Etheridge Translation of the Western Peshitto 
Dr. John Wesley Etheridge’s translation of the Western Peshitto 1846-1849 


-This work is in the Public Domain- 


Table of Contents................... 1 

IOC UCHOM iceiiasdeendaieesoorincns 2 
Mathai... 8 
MafkKOSiiuriisasnisa rran 39 
LUKO Sienasse neoa 59 
SUCMANOMicaiancwacsiukincadsceasas 93 
ACIS cite coh Petras ehtegie latin sctadaaies 118 
PUI OY CS a iecceccu tee enaterbodcuas 151 

TRUPIMAOY SS. occsiccisssnacinraan 164 
2Kurinthoyee.... s... ees 
GAlalOVOS.occiceviencaduncasernes 186 
EPNCSOVCC s cissctsuxoimaieaanarsas 191 

Philipisoyee...............:::02+ 196 
KulOSOyee..........::::eceeeeeee ee 200 
1Thesalonikoyee................- 203 
2Thesalonikoyee................ 206 
TTHMOINGOS ic csicicdeceincanannan 208 
2TIMOthEOS...............c cece eee 212 
MIO Saree aa 215 
Philemon... 217 
EDrOy@ O. csarsritasoarmenneieen 218 
JAMMU iccnnacavaaeeradaanaaectaeata 229 
TP GUC Senise 233 
2P CMOS cichsadiucieesciuaivandaiabs 237 
TOUPAMON ois ciacaccwusiaeawaseccsais 240 

ZUUMANOMN sixinasiaievanedduanvenan 244 

SUUIMAMNOM a ixssessreagoaieadwaaiada 245 

dJiNuda eesin 246 
Revelation... 247 


Introduction to the Peschito Syriac New Testament: 
Translated into English by John Wesley Etheridge 


To the reader 


lt did not occur to me till the following sheets had been committed to the press, that 


the present translation of the Gospels may possibly be considered in some quarters as 
an attempt to impugn the excellence of our authorized English version. Should such be 
the case, | would hereby earnestly disclaim any intention of the kind. My sole wish has 
been to offer in our own language an accurate representation of the evangelic canon, as 
read from the primeval days by the Christians of the East. The invaluable English 
version in ordinary use among us having been made from the Greek, and the following 
translation from a text extant in a tongue altogether different, a comparison like that now 
deprecated can only be instituted by a departure from the common principles of reason 
and equity. 

At the same time | would suggest, that a collation of the one text with the other, for the 
purpose of ascertaining the verbal sameness or disagreement of the gospel testimony 
as given by two witnesses so perfectly impartial and independent, will form a profitable 
study to the Christian, and impart a profound conviction of the immutable integrity of the 
New Testament record. 

| have retained the titles of the sections for public reading, merely as illustrative of 
some points referred to in the preceding sketches of the Syrian communions.* On every 
other account they would have been omitted; not only because, in certain instances, 
they betray a relationship to superstitions which are unworthy of the Christian name, but 
because they interfere with the continuity of the sacred discourse, and in some minds 
may tend to weaken the perception of that divine authority which reigns alone, and for 
ever, through the entire compass of the inspired writings. 


London, 
September, 1846. 


The Four Gospels after the Peschito Syriac 


VERITATI PRORSUS EST CONSENTANEUM, INTRA IPSA ECCLESIAE CHRISTI 
INITIA, VEL AB APOSTOLIS IPSIS, VEL AB EORUM DISCIPULIS, VERSIONEM 
SYRIACAM PROFECTAM. 


EM. TREMELLIUS. 


This translation of the Four Gospels has been made directly from the Syriac. The text 
chiefly followed is that of Gutbir, 1664, compared with the editions of Paris, G. F. 
Boderiani, 1584, Walton in the London Polyglot, and Schaaf’s of 1709. The rubrics for 
the lessons are from Walton. The object of the translator having been to offer in English 
an accurate representation of these venerable eastern scriptures, the version is as 
literal as the structure of the two languages seems to admit. From a desire to preserve 
the air and manner, as well as meaning, of the original, he has retained the Syrian 
orthography of the proper names, and has left some of the peculiar denominatives of 
the gospel narrative untranslated. Such are the titles of Pharishee, the Pharisees, 
Zadukoyee, the Sadducees, Sophree, the Scribes, Malphona, Doctor, &c. The name of 
the Divine Being, ALOHA, (the ALOHA of the Hebrew revelation,) is also left unaltered. 
In the expression of these names the method of the Nestorians has been followed 
rather than that used by the Western Syrians, because in the former the pronunciation 
more fully accords with the orthography. 


Preface. 


The work here submitted completes the translation of the Syriac New Testament, 
begun in a former volume.* We may now compare the sacred text, as read in the 
Eastern churches for sixteen or seventeen centuries, with that which, during the same 
lapse of time, has been received in the West. The comparison of these independent 
witnesses will demonstrate the essential integrity and incorrupt preservation of the 
inspired documents of the Christian dispensation. 

For the seeming delay which has attended the publication of the volume, an apology 
is due to those friends who have inquired, from time to time, for its advertised 
appearance. But the minute attention required by the nature of the work itself, and the 
circumstance, that the only time in general which could be spared for the prosecution of 
it has been that of uncertain intervals in the course of regular professional duties, will 
sufficiently account for the slowness of its progress. The former volume, on the 
Gospels, was prepared during a residence on the Continent, when the greater part of 
his time was at the translator’s own disposal; but nearly all the present work has been 
accomplished amid the daily toils of the Christian ministry in London, and in hours which 
might, in some respects, have been advantageously spent in mental or bodily 
recreation, or repose. 

At the tribunal of biblical criticism the writer respectfully prays for a kind, but impartial, 


judgment on the correctness or incorrectness of the translation. It is very proper for him 
to attest his own belief, that, through the adorable grace of God, he has been enabled to 
give a version in all essential respects a faithful representation of the Syriac Scriptures; 
did he not believe so, he would not presume to offer it: but that class of readers who, 
though intelligent students of the Bible, have not directed their attention to this branch of 
inquiry, will naturally look for a corroborative testimony to the correctness of such an 
estimate, that their confidence in the translation may be warranted by some competent 
authority. It is on this account, as well as with a view to the thankful adoption of any 
improvement which may be pointed out, that he would solicit this adjudication. 

For the sake of rendering the work as complete as possible, there is added a 
translation of the Epistles and Book of Revelation, wanting in the Peschito Canon, from 
the more modern Syriac texts first edited by Dr. Pococke and Louis De Dieu, so as to 
comprise all the holy books which we receive as inspired New-Testament Scripture. 

With regard to the Acts and Epistles, the edition which the translator has followed has 
been that of Schaaf, on account of its having long been a sort of textus receptus of the 
Syriac Testament throughout the theological world. This has been collated with others, 
as occasionally indicated in the margin. Notwithstanding the labours of learned men in 
this department since the time of Schaaf, we are yet in want of a critical edition of the 
Peschito text both of the Old and New Testaments; as likewise a uniform collection of 
the books of the Hexaplar Syriac, and an edition of the Harkleian New Testament, with 
such remains of the Philoxenian as may exist in the MSS. brought home by the late Mr. 
Rich, or among those with which the treasures of the British Museum have been 
amplified through the diligence of Archdeacon Tattam. On this subject much interest 
has been awakened by the preface of the Rev. Mr. Cureton’s edition of the Syrian 
Ignatius. 

In this volume we have omitted the Rubrics of the oriental lessons from the body of 
the text, and given them in a separate collection or index at the end. Interspersed 
among the Scripture itself, as in the translation of the Gospels, such matters are 
confessedly out of place. This first index is followed by another, which is intended to 
facilitate the collation of any particular portion of the Eastern and Western Testaments. 
(These have been omitted from the text.) 

For the prologues which introduce the translation little need be said. They will be 
received for what they are worth. The first part condenses a variety of information which 
would have been very acceptable to the writer himself several years ago, and which he 
presumes will be welcome to some who are now at the outset of their inquiries. In the 
second part we enter a more elevated and more spiritual region. It is good to be there ! 
Perhaps this section would not be useless in Bible classes and family readings, as well 
as in the cabinet of the solitary Christian. 


January 1st, 1849. 
* The Syrian Churches; their early History, Liturgies, and Literature. With a literal 


Translation of the Four Gospels, from the Peschito, or Canon of holy Scripture in use 
among the oriental Christians from the earliest Times. London. Longmans. 1846. 


The Apostolical Acts and Epistles from the Peschito Syriac 


As with the Gospels already published, the following version of the Acts and Epistles 
has been made directly from the Syriac. We have Latin translations of the Peschito, by 
Sionita, De la Boderie, and Schaaf; but they have not obtained the entire approval of the 
learned. The Latin translations in the Polyglots are not to be fully depended on. Dr. 
Pococke, who, as an Arabic scholar, Golius has said, was second to no man, has 
pronounced the condemnation of the Latin rendering of the Arabic scriptures in those 
great works; and with respect to that of the Peschito, Michaelis affirms, that the author, 
Sionita, had " executed it with the greatest inaccuracy; as almost every page betrays 
either hurry or ignorance, and not seldom both qualities united ;" while of the translation 
of Schaaf it may be observed, that, though not liable to this sweeping charge of 
inaccuracy, it is not sufficiently idiomatic to be a true representation of the Syrian 
Testament. It is with the utmost diffidence that | offer this effort in our own language. 
Should it assist any of my fellow-disciples in their inquiry into the meaning of the divine 
oracles, the solitary toil of some years will not have been in vain. | have endeavoured to 
render the Syriac as literally as the structure of the two languages would allow; having 
been desirous, not merely of translating, in the general sense of the term, but of giving, 
as faithfully as possible, a delineation of the peculiar cast of expression which the 
inspired writings possess in this venerable text of the oriental church. 

On this account, as | have observed before, the ordinary choice enjoyed by a 
translator between the literal and the free method of rendering his subject could not be 
exercised; since the translation here, to be of any specific utility to the biblical student 
unacquainted with Aramaic, must, of necessity, be given ad verbum. It should be such a 
version as that defined by a great master in the science of interpretation: "An exact 
image of the original; in which image nothing should be drawn either greater or less, 
better or worse, than the original; but, so composed, that it might be acknowledged as 
another original itself. It follows, that a translator should use those words, and those 
only, which clearly express all the meaning of the author, and in the same manner as 
the author." * And this has been humbly but strenuously attempted in the present 
undertaking, both with regard to the grammatical signification of words, and, as far as 
possible, their collocated order. It need not be remarked, that such a plan would not 
admit of an artificial elegance of style; after the manner, for example, of Castellio’s Latin 
Testament. Had the individual now writing been ambitious of any thing of this kind, he 
must have sought for some more appropriate document on which to make the essay; for 
the task, which it has been his sacred solace as well as labour to fulfil, prohibited even a 
paraphrastic expression; and demanded that verbal faithfulness to the original, that 
scrupulous parsimony and careful pondering of words, that tenacitas verborum cum 
perspicuitate sententiae, which St. Augustine so commends in the unpolished Italic 
version; t that determination, in short, to translate literally, not diffusively; to employ 
such words, and those all in meaning, number, and collocation, as would best portray a 
true copy of the original; and, following the principle laid down by Morus, so to exhibit 
the author’s thoughts in our own language, as to make it apparent, that, had he himself 
used our language, he would have expressed himself just as the translator has done. 
But, when we apply such a principle to the rendering of the TRUE SAYINGS OF GOD, 
we may well say, with the profoundest awe," Who is sufficient for these things?" 


* ERNESTI. 
t AUGUSTINUS De Doctrina Christiana, lib. xi. 
+ MORUS, Dissert. De Discrimine Sensus et Significationis in Interpretando. 


Introduction to the Second Epistle of Peter, The second and third 
of John, The Epistle of Jude, and The Book of Revelation. 


THOUGH the Second Epistle of Peter, the Second and Third of John, the Epistle of 
Jude, and the Book of Revelation are not found in the New-Testament canon of the 
Syrian churches, the circumstance in no way seriously interferes with the plain 
authenticity of those productions, as integral parts of the inspired volume. The Peschito 
translation, in which they do not occur, was probably effected before the Second of St. 
Peter had travelled far beyond the region for which it had been immediately destined; 
before the church had pronounced any definite judgment on the limits of the canon 
itself; and, possibly, before the Apocalypse of St. John had been committed to writing, 
or the copies so multiplied as to be extensively read out of Asia Minor. | shall not occupy 
any of the little space which remains in the present volume by a detail of the formal 
evidences by which the authenticity of these particular books is established: they may 
be found in the prefaces of our best commentators, or in the more elaborate treatises of 
Jones and Lardner.1 

In relation to the present bearing of the subject, it is enough to remark, that the Syrian 
church itself has never denied the divinity of those books. They are quoted by its 
leading divines as holy scripture. Thus the Apocalypse is cited by Jacob of Edessa, 
though in a version different from the Syrian one now extant, and with the origin or fate 
of which | am not acquainted; and by Ephrem, in the fourth century; a hundred years 
earlier, by Hippolytus, a Bishop of Aden, who formally maintained its authority against 
the objections of Caius, and earlier still, in the second century, Theophilus of Antioch, in 
his controversy with Hermogenes, appealed to it as an inspired book.2 All these authors 
wrote in Syriac; and the references they make to the Revelation strongly indicate the 
existence, so far back as the earliest of them, of a version of the book in that language. 
In like manner St. Ephrem quotes the Second of Peter, and the Third of John, and the 
whole of the Epistle of Jude. We admit that it cannot be demonstrated that there was a 
Syriac version of these books then extant; but as the fact of such quotations in the 
works of Syrian writers must be considered a presumption in the affirmative, so the 
manner in which they are cited leaves no doubt as to the supreme estimate of their 
authority entertained by the writers themselves. 

It is barely possible that the text now translated into English might be identical with 
that made by Polycarp, the coadjutor of Philoxenus. (See Proleg. p. 33.) In this case it is 
evident that Thomas of Harkleia must have effected greater changes in the work which 
he professedly revised, than we have generally supposed; and, in fact, created a new 
version, rather than emended a former one. The greater likelihood, however, is, that the 
work before us is later than either that by Polycarp or by Thomas; though he who 
performed it undoubtedly laboured with the latter outspread before him; as the same 
principle of translation reigns through each, and instances occur in which the very same 


phrase is employed by both. But neither the one nor the other could approach the 
excellence of the Peschito. Compared with that, the version of the four epistles and that 
of the Apocalypse are very inferior productions. To use the language of Professor Hug, 
with whom every man will concur who has read the works in question, " They do not 
come near the Peschito either in the mode of rendering an original writing into a foreign 
tongue, or in the other ideas of the author. They are forced, and laboriously adapted to 
the letter of the text, without regard to purity of diction, and, in some instances, without a 
happy notion of the sense of the original" Yet an important circumstance is certain, they 
were made directly from the Greek; as, from a scrupulous resolution to be as literal as 
possible, the translator has sometimes appended the terminations of the cases of Greek 
nouns to those which had been incorporated into his own language, which knows 
nothing of such distinctions, and has supplied the want of a separate definite article in 
Syriac by rendering the Greek one by the demonstrative pronouns, hono, "this," hau, 
"that," holen, "these," ailen, "those;" a usage productive, in many passages, of a 
barbarous and unpleasant effect. nevertheless, the determined adherence of this 
translator to the very letter of his original, serves to give us increased confidence in the 
value of the work, as an exact representation of the wording of a class of manuscripts 
older, perhaps, than any now in being. 

The version of the four catholic epistles was first brought to light in Europe by Dr. 
Pococke, who discovered it among the manuscript treasures of the Bodleian library at 
Oxford, and published it with the Greek text, and a Latin version, in a small quarto, in 
1630. 

It has been reprinted in the Polyglots and subsequent editions of the Syriac Testament. 


1 Also in HUG’S Einleitung ins N. T. th. 2: EICHHORN’S ditto, dritter bd.; NIETZSCHE, 
Epistola Petri posterior Auctori suo contra Grotium vindicata atque asserta. Lips. 1735. 
For the genuineness of the Apocalypse we have a good summary of arguments in 
STORR’S Biblical Theology, book i. sect. 3. 2 EUSEB. Eccles. Hist. iv. 24. 


The Preaching of Mathai the Apostle 


1:1 The record of the generation of Jeshu the 
Meshicha, the son of David, son of Abraham. 

? Abraham begat Ishok, Ishok begat Jakub, 
Jakub begat Jehuda and his brethren, 

Jehuda begat Pharets and Zoroch from 
Thomar. Pharets begat Hetsron, Hetsron begat 
Arom, 

* Arom begat Aminodob, Aminodob begat 
Nachshun, Nachshun begat Salmun, 

° Salmun begat Booz from Rochab, Booz begat 
Ubid from Ruth, Ubid begat Ishai, 

ê Ishai begat David the king; ‘David begat 
Shelemun from [her who had been] the wife of 
Uria; 

7 Shelemun begat Rehebaam, Rehebaam begat 
Abia, Abia begat Asa, 

è Asa begat Johushaphat, Johushaphat begat 
Jurom, Jurom begat Uzia, 

* Uzia begat Juthom, Juthom begat Ahaz, Ahaz 
begat Hezakia, 

10 Hezakia begat Menasha, Menasha begat 
Amun, Amun begat Jushia, 

11 Jushia begat Jukania and his brethren at the 
exile of Bobel. 

And after the exile of Bobel Jukania begat 

Shalathiel, Shalathiel begat Zurbobel, 

13 Zurbobel begat Abiud, Abiud begat Aliakim, 
Aliakim begat Ozur, 

14 Ozur begat Zoduk, Zoduk begat Akin, Akin 
begat Aliud, 

15 Aliud begat Aliozar, Aliozar begat Mathan, 
Mathan begat Jakub, 

1€ Jakub begat Jauseph, husband’ of Mariam, 
of whom was born JESHU who is called the 
Meshicha’. 

17 Thus all the generations from Abraham to 
David (were) fourteen generations; and from 
David to the exile of Bobel, fourteen 
generations; and from the exile of Bobel to the 
Meshicha, fourteen generations. 

18 Now the nativity of Jeshu the Meshicha was 
thus: While Mariam his mother was betrothed to 
Jauseph, before they could be consociated, she 
was found to be with child from the Spirit of 
Holiness. 


* Matthew 1:6 - Khabouris, and David 

* Matthew 1:16a — Gowra, “husband, custodian, or 
father’ 

> Matthew 1:16b - Pronounced Meshee'ha 


19 But Jauseph her husband was just, and, not 
willing to defame her, meditated privately to 
release her. 

20 But while (on) these (things) he reflected, an 
angel of the LorD appeared to him in a dream, 
and said to him, Jauseph, son of David, fear not 
to take Mariam thy wife; for that which is 
conceived in her is from the Spirit of Holiness. 
?1 She shall give birth to a son, and thou shalt 
call his name JESHU; for he shall save his 
people from their sins. 

?? Now all this was done, that what was spoken 
from the Lorp by the prophet* might be fulfilled: 
*° Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall 
bring forth the son, and they shall call his name 
Amanuel; which is interpreted, With us (is) our 
Aloha. 

4 Then Jauseph, when he had arisen from his 
sleep, did as the angel of the LorD commanded 
him, and took unto him his wife; 

*° and knew her not until she had given birth to 
her son, the first born; and she called his name 
Jeshu. 


2:1 Now when Jeshu was born in Beth-lechem 
of Jehuda, in the days of Herodes the king, there 
came Magians” from the East to Urishlem: 

? and they said, Where is the king of the Jews® 
who is born? for we have seen his star in the 
east, and have come to worship him. 

° But Herodes the king heard, and was troubled, 
and all Urishlem with him. 

* And he assembled all the chief priests and 
scribes of the people, and anxiously inquired of 
them where the Meshicha should be born. 

° But they said, In Beth-lechem of Jehuda; for 
so it is written in the prophet: 

ê Also thou, Beth-lechem of Jehuda, wast not 
the least among the kings of Jehuda; for from 
thee shall come forth the king who shall be as a 
shepherd to my people Isroel. 

7 Then Herodes privately called the Magians, 
and learned from them at what time the star 
appeared to them: 

2 and he sent them to Beth-lechem, and said to 
them, Go and inquire diligently concerning the 
child; and when you have found him, come, 
show me, and | also will go and will worship him. 


^ Matthew 1:22 — by the hand of the prophet 
> Matthew 2:1 - Magushee 
ê Matthew 2:2 - Jinudoyee 


* But they, when they had heard the king, went 
forth; and, lo, the star, which they had seen in 
the east, proceeded before them, until it came 
and stood over against where the child was. 

10 Now when they saw the star, they rejoiced 
with very great joy. 

11 And they entered the house, and beheld the 
child with Mariam his mother; and they fell down, 
and worshipped him. And they opened their 
treasures, and offered unto him oblations; gold, 
and myrrh, and frankincense. 

12 And it was shown to them in a dream, that 
they should not return unto Herodes; so, by 
another way, they went unto their place. 

13 And when they were gone, the angel of the 
LORD appeared in a dream unto Jauseph, and 
said to him, Arise, take the child and his mother, 
and flee into Metsreen, and there be until | tell 
thee; for it will be that Herodes will seek the 
child, that he may destroy him. 

Then Jauseph arose, took up the child and 
his mother, and fled by night into Metsreen, 

15 and was there until the death of Herodes. 
That it might be fulfilled which was spoken from 
the Lorp by the prophet, saying, Out of 
Metsreen have | called my son. 

1€ Then Herodes, when he saw that he had 
been deluded by the Magians, was greatly 
wroth, and sent (and) killed all the children of 
Beth-lechem, and all its limits, from two years 
and under’, according to the time which he had 
inquired from the Magians. 

17 Then was fulfilled what was spoken by 
Eramio the prophet, who said, 

18 A cry was heard in Rometha; weeping and 
great lamentation; Rochel weeping for her 
children, and not willing to be comforted, 
because they are not. 

19 But when Herodes, the king, was dead, the 
angel of the LorD appeared in a dream to 
Jauseph in Metsreen, 

*° and said to him, Arise, take the child and his 
mother, and go into the land of Isroel; for they 
are dead who sought the life of the child. 

?1 And Jauseph arose, (and) took the child and 
his mother, and came into the land of Isroel. 

*? But when he heard that Arkelaos was the 
king in Jehud, instead of Herodes his father, he 
was afraid to go thither: and it was shown to him 
in a dream, that he should go into the region of 
Galila. 

?3 And he came and dwelt in a city which is 
called Natsrath. So would be fulfilled that which 


7 Matthew 2:16 — a son of two years 


was spoken by the prophet, that a Nazarene? he 
should be called. 


3:1 Now in those days came Juchanon® the 
Baptizer preaching in the desert of Jehud, 

? and saying, Repent! the kingdom of heaven 
hath drawn nigh. 

3 For this is he of whom it was spoken by 
Eshaia the prophet: The voice which crieth in the 
desert, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make 
his paths plain. 

* But this Juchanon, his clothing was of the hair 
of camels, with a loins-belt of leather upon his 
loins; and his food was locusts and wilderness- 
honey. 

5 Then went forth to him Urishlem"?, and all 
Jehud, and the whole country about Jurdan; 

ê and were baptized of him in Jurdan, the river, 
while they were confessing their sins. 

But when he saw many of the Pharishee and 
Zodukoyee coming to be baptized, he said to 
them, Generation of vipers, who hath showed 
you to escape from the wrath that cometh? 

Work, therefore, fruits which are suitable to 
repentance. 

Neither ruminate and say within yourselves, 
that Abraham is father to us; for | say to you that 
Aloha is able from these stones to raise up sons 
unto Abraham. 

1° But, behold, the axe lieth at the root of the 
trees; every tree, therefore, which maketh not 
good fruit is cut down and falleth into the fire. 

"|, indeed, baptize you with water unto 
repentance; but He who cometh after me is 
mightier than l; he, whose sandals | am not 
worthy to bear,---he baptizeth you with the Spirit 
of Holiness and with fire. 

1? He (it is) whose fan is in his hand, and, 
purifying his floors, the wheat he gathereth into 
his garner, but the chaff he burneth with the fire 
that is not quenched. 

° Then came Jeshu from Galila unto Jurdan to 
Juchanan to be baptized of him. 

But Juchanon prohibited him, and said, | 
need from thee to be baptized, and hast thou 
come unto me? 

15 But Jeshu answered and said unto him, 
Permit [this] now; for thus it becometh us to 
accomplish all righteousness. And then he 
permitted him. 

1€ But when Jeshu was baptized, he 
immediately ascended from the waters; and the 


8 Matthew 2:23 - Natsroio 
? Matthew 3:1- or, Yu’hanan 
1 Matthew 3:5 — pron, oorishlem 


heaven was opened unto him; and he saw the 
Spirit of Aloha, who descended, like the dove, 
and came upon him. 

17 And, lo, the voice from heaven, which said, 
This (is) my Son, the Beloved, in whom | have 
delighted. 


4:1 Then Jeshu was led by the Spirit of Holiness 
into the desert, that he should be tempted by the 
Accuser. 

? And he fasted forty days and forty nights; but 
afterward he hungered. 

And he who tempteth approached and said, If 
the Son thou art of Aloha, say that these stones 
shall become bread. 

But he answered and said, It is written that not 
by bread alone liveth the Son of man, but by 
every word which proceedeth from the mouth of 
Aloha. 

° Then the Accuser taketh him to the holy city, 
and caused him to stand on the pinnacle of the 
temple; 

ê and said to him, If the Son thou art of Aloha, 
throw thyself down; for it is written that his 
angels he shall command concerning thee, and 
upon their hands they shall bear thee, that thou 
strike not against a stone thy foot. 

7 Jeshu said to him, Again it is written, Thou 
shalt not tempt the Lorp thy Aloha. 

ê Again the Accuser took him to a mountain 
which is exceeding high, and showed him all the 
kingdoms of the world and their glory; 

* and said to him, These all to thee will I give, if 
thou wilt fall and worship me, 

10 Then said Jeshu to him, Away with thee, 
Satana! for it is written that the Lorp thy Aloha 
thou shalt worship, and him only thou shalt 
serve. 

" Then the Accuser left him, and, behold, the 
angels drew nigh and ministered unto him. 

12 But when Jeshu heard that Juchanan was 
perfected, he removed into Galila. 

13 And he left Natsrath, and came and dwelt in 
Kaphar-Nachum by the sea-side"' on the 
borders of Zabolon and of Naptholi. 

14 That the thing might be fulfilled which was 
spoken by the prophet Eshaia, who said, 

15 The land of Zabolon, the land of Naptholi, the 
way of the sea beyond Jurdan, Galila of the 
peoples. 

16 The people who sat in darkness the great 
light hath seen; and they who have sat in the 
region and shadow of death, the light has arisen 
upon them. 


11 Matthew 4:13 - by the hand of the sea 


17 From that time began Jeshu to preach, and to 
say, Repent! for the kingdom of heaven hath 
drawn nigh. 

18 And while he walked by the sea of Galila, he 
saw two brethren, Shemun who was called 
Kipha, and Andreas his brother, who were 
casting their nets into the sea’, for they were 
fishers. 

19 And Jeshu said to them, Come after me, and 
| will make you to become fishers of men. 

20 And they immediately forsook their nets and 
went after him. 

?1 And when he had passed thence, he saw two 
other brethren, Jakub-bar-Zabdai and Juchanan 
his brother, in a vessel with Zabdai their father, 
repairing their nets: and Jeshu called them; 

?? and they forthwith left the vessel and their 
father, and went after him. 

?3 And Jeshu perambulated all Galila, and 
taught in their synagogues”, and preached the 
announcement of the kingdom, and healed all 
disease and affliction in the people. 

?4 And his fame was heard in all Suria; and they 
brought to him all those who were grievously 
affected with various diseases, and those who 
were pressed down by strong pains, and 
demoniacs, and lunatics, and the paralysed; and 
he healed them. 

*° And there went after him great gatherings 
from Galila, and from the ten cities, and from 
Urishlem, and from Jehud, and from beyond 
Jurdan. 


5:1 But when Jeshu saw the multitudes, he 

ascended a mountain; and when he had sat 

down, his disciples drew near to him; 

* and he opened his mouth and taught them, 

saying: 

° Blessed (are) the poor in spirit, for theirs is the 

kingdom of heaven. 

* Blessed the mourners, for they shall be 

comforted. 

° Blessed the meek, for they shall inherit the 

earth. 

ê Blessed they who hunger and thirst unto 

righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. 
Blessed the merciful, for upon them shall be 

mercy. 

è Blessed they who are pure in their hearts, for 

they shall see Aloha. 

? Blessed the makers of peace, for the children 

of Aloha shall they be called. 


12 Matthew 4:18 — by the hand of the sea 
13 Matthew 4:23 — or, assemblies, congregations 


1 Blessed they who are persecuted because of 
righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of 
heaven. 

" Blessed are you when they treat you with 
reviling, and persecute you, and say concerning 
you every evil word, for my sake, in falsity. 

? Then be glad and exult, for your reward is 
great in heaven; for so persecuted they the 
prophets who were before you. 

13 You are the salt of the earth: but if it happen 
that salt become tasteless, with what shall it be 
seasoned? It goeth for nothing but to be thrown 
without and trodden down by men. 

You are the light of the world: It is not 
possible that a city which is built upon a hill can 
be hidden. 

15 Nor do they kindle a lamp and place it 
beneath a measure, but on a candlestick, and it 
enlighteneth all who are in the house. 

So let your light shine before the sons of 
men, that they may see your good works, and 
glorify your Father who is in heaven. 

’ Think not that | came to loose the law or the 
prophets: not that | might loose, but that | might 
fulfill. 

18 For, Amen | say unto you, that until heaven 
and earth shall pass away, one yod, or one 
point’, shall not pass from the law, till all be 
done. 

19 Every one, therefore, who shall set loose one 
from these least commandments, and shall so 
teach the children of men, the least shall he be 
called in the kingdom of heaven: but every one 
who shall do and teach [them], this [one] shall 
be called great in the kingdom of heaven. 
°° For | say to you, that unless your 
righteousness shall abound more than that of 
the scribes"? and the Pharishee, you shall not 
enter into the kingdom of heaven. 

?1 You have heard that it was said unto them 
who were before, Thou shalt not kill; and 
whosoever shall kill is obnoxious to the 
judgment. 

But | say unto you, that he who is angry 
against his brother rashly, is obnoxious to the 
judgment; and he who shall say to his brother, 
Thou empty one! is liable to the council; and 
every one who shall say, Thou fool! is liable to 
the gihano of fire. 

3 If it occur, therefore, that thou bring thy 
oblation to the altar, and there rememberest that 
thy brother retaineth some enmity against thee; 


14 Matthew 5:18 — or, line 
* Matthew 5:20 — Sophree, public teaching, 
preaching and writing clergy of the Jews 


*4 leave there thy oblation at the altar, and go, 
first be reconciled with thy brother, and then 
come and offer thy oblation. 
*° Be at one with thine adversary quickly, while, 
thou art with him in the way; lest thy adversary "° 
deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver 
thee to the exactor, and thou fall into the house 
of the bound. 
2 And, Amen I say unto thee, that thou shalt not 
come forth from thence till thou hast rendered 
the last shamuna”. 
7 You have heard that it hath been said, Thou 
shalt not commit adultery. 
?8 But | say to you, that every one who 
beholdeth a woman so as that he shall desire 
her, already committeth adultery in his heart. 
*° But if thy right eye cause thee to offend, root 
it out and cast it from thee: it is better to thee 
that one of thy members should perish, than that 
thy whole body should fall into gihano. 
°° And if thy right hand cause thee to offend, cut 
it off and cast it from thee; for it is better to thee 
that one from thy members should perish, rather 
than thy whole body should fall into gihano. 

31 It hath been said, that he who looseth his wife 
should give her a writing of divorcement. 
32 But | say unto you, that whosoever looseth 
his wife, except on account of fornication, 
maketh her to commit adultery; and whosoever 
taketh her who is sent away, committeth 
adultery. 
33 Again, you have heard it was said to those 
beforetime, Thou shalt not lie in thine oaths, but 
shalt fulfil thine oaths unto the Lorb. 
3% But | say unto you, Swear not at all: not by 
heaven, for it is the throne of Aloha; 
*° nor by earth, for it is the foot-stool beneath 
his feet; neither by Urishlem, for it is the city of 
the great king. 
°° Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, for thou 
canst not make a single hair in it either black or 
white. 
5” But let your discourse be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay; 
for whatsoever is more than these is from the 
evil. 
38 You have heard that it hath been said, An eye 
for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth. 
39 But | say unto you, that you shall not rise up 
against evil: but if any one strike thee on the 
right cheek, turn to him the other also. 

And if any one will contend with thee to take 
away thy tunic, leave him thy mantle also; 


16 Matthew 5:25 — Beel-Dino, Lord of strife 
17 Matthew 5:26 — a small coin valued at 1\8 of an 
asor 


“' and if aman compel thee one mile, go with 
him twain. 

42 Give to him who asketh from thee, and him 
who would borrow from thee refuse not. 

“8 You have heard that it hath been said, Thou 
shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine 

enemy `. 

“* But | say unto you, Love your enemies; bless 
them who execrate you; do that which is good to 
him who hateth you; and pray for them who lead 
you with a chain, and persecute you. 

48 That you may be the children of your Father 
who is in heaven, who causeth his sun to arise 
on the good and on the evil, and who sendeth 
showers on the just and on the unjust. 

ê For if you love those (only) who love you, 
what reward have you? do not even the tribute- 
gatherers this? 

7 And if you wish peace to your brethren only, 
what more do you than they? do not also the 
tribute-gatherers this? 

Be ye therefore perfect, as your Father who is 
in heaven is perfect! 


6:1 See that in your almsgiving you do it not 
before men, so as that you may be observed by 
them; otherwise no reward is for you with your 
Father who is in heaven. 

? When, therefore, thou art doing alms, sound 
not a trumpet before thee, as do the assumers 
of faces in the assemblies and streets, so that 
they may be praised from men; and, Amen | say 
to you, they receive their reward. 

3 But thou, when thou art doing thy alms, let not 
thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth, 

4 that thine alms may be in secret; and thy 
Father, who seeth in secret, shall recompense 
thee in openness. 

° And when thou prayest, be not as the face- 
takers, who love to stand in the assemblies and 
at the corners of the streets to pray, that they 
may be seen of men’: and truly | say to you that 
they receive their reward. 

But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy 
secret chamber, and shut thy door, and pray to 
thy Father who is in secret; and thy Father, who 
seeth in secret, shall reward thee in openness. 

And when thou art praying, be not wordy, like 
the profane; for they think that in much speaking 
they are heard. 

è Be you not like them, for your Father knoweth 
what is needful for you before that you ask him. 


18 Matthew 5:43 — Master of enmity 
19 Matthew 6:5 — the sons of men 


? Thus pray: Our Father who art in the heavens! 
be sanctified thy Name. 

"© Come thy kingdom. Be done thy will, as in 
heaven, also in earth. 

"' Give to us the bread of our need to-day; 

12 and forgive us our debts, as also we forgive 
our debtors; 

13 and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us 
from the evil. For thine is the kingdom and the 
power and the glory to the age of ages. 

14 For if you forgive men their trespasses, your 
Father who is in heaven will forgive you also. 

15 But if you will not forgive men, your Father 
also forgiveth not your trespasses unto you. 

ê When, too, you fast, be not morosely sad as 
the assumers of faces, for they defile their 
countenances so as that they may appear unto 
men to fast: and, Amen | say unto you, they 
receive their reward. 

But thou, when thou art fasting, wash thy face 
and anoint thine head, 

18 that it may not appear to men that thou art 
fasting, but to thy Father who is in secret; and 
thy Father who seeth in secret, he shall reward 
thee. 

19 Lay not up for yourselves treasures in the 
earth, a place where moth and rust corrupt, and 
where thieves dig through and steal: 

20 but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, 
where no moth and no rust corrupt, and where 
thieves do not dig through and steal. 

?1 For where your treasure is, there also your 
hearts are. 

2 The lamp of the body is the eye: if thine eye 
therefore be perfect, thy whole body will be 
illuminated; 

?3 but if thine eye be evil, thy whole body will be 
dark. If therefore the light that is in thee be 
darkness, what will thy darkness be? 

** No man can serve two lords; for the one he 
will hate, and the other he will love, or the one 
he will honour, and the other he will neglect: you 
cannot serve Aloha and riches. 

Wherefore | say unto you, Let not your souls 
be anxious what you shall eat and what you 
shall drink, and for your bodies what you shall 
wear. ls not the life more excellent than food, 
and the body than raiment? 

26 Behold the fowls of the heaven; they sow not, 
neither do they reap, nor collect into granaries; 
yet your Father who is in heaven nourisheth 
them: are you not far more considerable than 
they? 

? But who among you by being anxious can 
add to his stature one cubit? 


?8 and concerning raiment why are you 
anxious? Look upon the lilies of the wilderness 
how they increase; they toil not, neither do they 
spin. 

? Yet | say to you, Not even Shelemun in all his 
glory was covered like one from among these. 

° But if the herb of the field, which to-day 
exists, and tomorrow falleth into the oven, Aloha 
thus clotheth, how much more you, little of faith? 
31 Be not anxious, therefore, nor say, What shall 
we eat, or, What shall we drink, or, How shall we 
be covered? 

32 For after all these things do the people of the 
world? inquire: but your Father who is in heaven 
knoweth that also by you are required these all. 
33 But seek first the kingdom of Aloha and his 
righteousness, and all these shall be added unto 
you. 

34 Be not therefore anxious for to-morrow; the 
morrow shall care for its own: the evil of to-day 
is enough for it. 


7:1 Judge not, that you be not judged. 

? For with the judgment that you judge, you shall 
be judged; and with the measure that you mete, 
it shall be measured to you. 

° But why dost thou look at the rod that is in thy 
brother’s eye, while the rafter that is in thine own 
eye thou dost not consider? 

“Or how sayest thou to thy brother, Permit that 
| draw forth the rod from thine eye, and, behold, 
there is a rafter in thine own eye? 

Hypocrite! draw forth first the rafter from thine 
own eye, and then thou wilt see to draw forth the 
rod from thy brother's eye. 

ê Give not the holy unto dogs, and throw not 
your precious stones before swine, lest they 
trample them under their feet, and turn again 
and rend you. 

7 Ask, and it shall be given to you; seek, and 
you shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto 
you. 

8 For every one who asketh receiveth, and he 
who seeketh findeth; and to him who knocketh it 
is opened. 

Or what man from among you, who if his son 
shall ask bread, will reach forth a stone to him? 
10 Or if a fish he shall ask of him, a serpent will 
he reach forth to him? 

11 If, therefore, you who are evil know to give 
good gifts unto your children, how much more 
shall your Father who is in heaven give good 
things to those who ask him? 


*° Matthew 6:32 — Western Peshitto omits “of the 
World” 


12 All therefore that you will that men shall do 
unto you, so also do you unto them: for this is 
the law and the prophets. 

13 Enter in at the narrow gate: for wide is the 
gate, and spacious the way, that conducteth to 
destruction; and they are many who go therein. 

14 How small is the gate, and narrow the way, 
that leadeth unto salvation; and they are few 
who find it! 

15 Beware of false prophets, who come to you in 
the clothing of sheep, but within are ravening 
wolves. 

1 By their fruits you shall know them. Do they 
gather from thorns grapes, or from briers figs? 

7 So every good tree maketh good fruits; but an 
evil tree maketh evil fruits. 

A good tree cannot make evil fruits, nor an 
evil tree make good fruits. 

? Every tree that maketh not good fruits is cut 
down, and falleth into the fire. 

20 Wherefore by their fruits you shall know them. 

" Not every one that saith to me, My Lord, my 
Lord, entereth into the kingdom of heaven; but 
he who doeth the will of my Father who is in 
heaven. 

2? Multitudes will say to me in that day My Lord, 
my Lord, in thy name have we not prophesied, 
and in thy name ejected devils, and in thy name 
performed many mighty works? 

?3 And then will | confess to them, | never knew 
you; go far from me, ye workers of iniquity. 

“ Every one therefore who heareth these my 
words, and doeth them, shall be likened to a 
wise man, who built his house upon a rock. 

*° And the rain descended, and the torrents 
came, and the winds blew, and rushed against 
that house, but it fell not, for its foundations were 
placed upon the rock. 

2 And every one who heareth these my words, 
and doeth them not, shall be likened to a man 
who built his house upon sand. 

*7 And the rain descended, and the torrents 
came, and the winds blew, and rushed against 
that house, and it fell, and the ruin of it was 
great. a 

And when Jeshu had finished these words, 
the multitudes wondered at his doctrine. 

For he taught them as one having power, and 
not as their scribes and the Pharishee. 


8:1 When he had descended from the mountain, 
great multitudes clave to him. 

And, behold, a certain leper came (and) 
worshipped him, and said, My Lord, if thou art 
willing, thou canst cleanse me. 


? And Jeshu extended his hand, and touched 
him, and said, | am willing: be clean; and in that 
very hour his leprosy was cleansed. 

“ And Jeshu said to him, See that thou tell no 
man, but go, show thyself to the priests, and 
offer the oblation that Musha required for their 
testimony. 

° Then when Jeshu had entered into 
Kapharnachum, a certain centurion approached 
him, and besought of him, 

ê saying, My Lord, my child is lying in the house, 
paralysed and grievously tormented. 

7 Jeshu saith to him, | will come and heal him. 

è The centurion answered and saith, My Lord, | 
am not worthy that thou shouldst come beneath 
my roof’; only speak in a word, and my child 
shall be healed. 

* For | also am a man under authority, and 
under my hand there are soldiers. | say to this 
one, Go, and he goeth; and to the other, Come, 
and he cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and 
he doeth. 

10 When Jeshu heard this, he was moved with 
admiration, and said to those with him, Truly | 
say to you, that in Isroel | have not found faith 
like this. 

" But I tell you, That many shall come from the 
east, and from the west, and shall recline with 
Abraham, and Is’hok, and Jakub, in the kingdom 
of the heavens; 

12 but the children of the kingdom shall go forth 
into outer darknesses; there will be weeping and 
gnashing of teeth. 

13 And Jeshu said unto the centurion, Go; as 
thou hast believed, it shall be to thee. And his 
child was healed in that very hour. 

14 And Jeshu came to the house of Shemun, 
and saw his mother-in-law lying, a fever having 
seized her. 

15 And he touched her with his hand, and the 
fever left her; and she arose and ministered to 
them. 

1€ And when it was evening, they brought before 
him many demoniacs, and he cast out their 
devils by a word; and all those who were heavily 
afflicted he healed. 

17 So was fulfilled what had been spoken by the 
prophet Eshaia, who said, That he should take 
our griefs, and bear our infirmities. 

Now when Jeshu saw the great multitudes 
which encompassed him, he commanded that 
they should go to the opposite shore. 


*1 Matthew 8:8 — or, shadow 


19 And a certain scribe approached him, and 
said, Rabi, | will come after thee to the place 
whither thou goest. 

20 Jeshu saith to him, The foxes have their 
dens, and the fowls of heaven a bower, but the 
Son of man hath not where to lay his head. 

21 And another from his disciples said to him, 
My Lord, permit me first to go and bury my 
father. 

?? But Jeshu said to him Come after me, and 
leave the dead ones burying their dead. 

23 And when Jeshu had ascended into the ship, 
his disciples ascended with him. 

*4 And, behold, a great commotion was made 
on the sea, insomuch that the vessel was 
covered by the waves; but Jeshu himself was 
asleep. 

?5 And the disciples approached him, that they 
might awake him, saying to him, Our Lord, 
deliver us, we are perishing! 

6 And Jeshu said to them, Why are you fearful, 
you little in faith? Then he arose, and forbade 
the wind and the sea, and there was a great 
calm. 

? But the men were struck with wonder, saying, 
What (being) is this, to whom the winds and the 
sea are obedient? 

?8 And when Jeshu came to the other side, to 
the region of the Godroyee, there met him two 
demoniacs, who came forth from the place of 
sepulchres, exceedingly malignant, insomuch 
that no man could pass by that way. 
2° And they shouted, saying, What to us, and to 
thee, Jeshu, son of Aloha? Hast thou come 
hither before the time, to torment us? 
5° Now there was at a distance from them a 
herd of many swine feeding. 

31 Those demons, therefore, supplicated from 
him, saying, If thou cast us out, suffer us to go 
into the herd of swine. 

32 Jeshu saith to them, Go: and immediately 
they went forth, and entered into the swine; and 
the whole herd rushed directly over the rock, 
and, plunging into the sea, perished in the 
waters. 

33 And they who tended them, fled, and went 
into the city, and showed every thing that was 
done, and what concerned these demoniacs. 

34 And the whole city came forth to meet Jeshu 
himself; and when they beheld him, they 
besought from him that he would remove from 
their coasts. 


9:1 And he ascended (into) the ship, and went 
over, and came to his city. 


? And they brought to him a paralytic lying on a 
bed; and Jeshu saw their faith, and said to the 
paralytic, Be comforted, my son, thy sins are 
forgiven thee. 

3 But men from among the scribes said within 
themselves, This blasphemeth. 

* But Jeshu knew their reasonings, and said to 
them, Why reason ye evil in your hearts? 

° For which is easier, to say, Forgiven are thy 
sins, or to say, Arise, walk? 

ê But that ye may know that authority hath the 
Son of man in the earth to remit sins, he saith to 
him---the paralytic,---Arise, lift up thy bed, and 
go to thy house: 

and he arose (and) went to his house. 

® When the assembly saw this, they feared, and 
glorified Aloha who had given such power as 
this unto men. 

? And when Jeshu had passed thence, he sawa 
man who was sitting at the place of the tribute- 
takers, whose name was Mathai; and he said to 
him, Come after me; and he arose and went 
after him. 

10 And while he reclined in the house, there 
came to him many tribute-gatherers and sinners, 
and reclined with Jeshu and with his disciples. 

11 And when the Pharishee saw (it), they say to 
his disciples, Why doth your master eat with 
tribute-takers and sinners? 

12 But Jeshu, when he heard (it), said to them, 
The healthful have no need for the physician, 
but they who are diseased”. 

13 Go, learn what that is:---" | require mercy, and 
not sacrifice; " for I am not come to call the 
righteous, but the sinners. 

Then drew nigh to him the disciples of 
Juchanon, and said, Why do we and the 
Pharishee fast much, and thy disciples fast not? 

15 Jeshu said to them, Neither can the sons of 
the marriage-chamber fast while the bridegroom 
is with them: but the days are coming when the 
bridegroom shall be taken up from them, and 
then shall they fast. 

1€ No man inserteth a piece of new cloth upon 
an old garment, lest he should take away its 
fulness from that garment, and the rent be 
greater. 

Neither do they pour new wine into old 
bottles”, that the bottles may not be broken, and 
the wine be spilled, and the bottles perish. But 
they pour new wine into new bottles, and both 
are preserved. 


2 Matthew 9:12 — grievously affected 
3 Matthew 9:17 — or, sacks, skins 


18 While he spake these words with them, a 
certain chief came, drew near, worshipped him, 
and said, My daughter is now dead; but come, 
lay thy hand upon her, and she shall live! 

13 And Jeshu arose, with his disciples, and went 
after him. 

20 And, behold, a woman whose blood had 
flowed twelve years, came behind him, and 
touched the edge of his vestment. 

21 Eor she was saying within herself, If | touch 
but his garment, | shall be healed. 

?? But Jeshu turned and seeth her, and said to 
her, Be comforted, my daughter, thy faith hath 
saved thee”. And the woman was healed from 
that very hour. 

?3 And Jeshu came to the ruler’s house, and 
saw the minstrels and the crowds which were 
making a tumult. 

24 And he said to them, Retire; for the damsel is 
not dead, but asleep. And they laughed at him. 
*° And when he had put forth the crowds, he 
entered, and took her by the hand; and the 
damsel arose. 

6 And the rumour of this went forth through all 
that land. 

“7 And when Jeshu had passed thence, two 
blind men clave to him, and besought him, and 
said, Have compassion on us, Son of David! 

?8 And when he had come into the house, these 
blind men were brought to him. Jeshu saith to 
them, Believe you that | am able to do this? 
They say to him, Yes, our Lord! 

?9 Then he touched their eyes, and said, As you 
believe be it to you. 

3 And immediately their eyes were opened. 
And Jeshu forbad them and said, Beware lest 
any man know. 

31 But they went forth and spread the report of it 
through all that land. 

32 And when Jeshu went forth, they brought to 
him a dumb person in whom was a demon. 

33 And when the demon had gone out, the dumb 
spake; and the multitudes were astonished, and 
said, Never was it thus seen in Isroel. 

3% But the Pharishee said, By the chief of the 
devils he casteth out devils. 

°° And Jeshu itinerated in all their cities and 
villages, and taught in their assemblies, and 
preached the gospel of the kingdom, and healed 
all diseases and all pains. 

°° But when Jeshu saw the multitudes, he had 
compassion upon them, because they fainted 
and were dispersed as sheep that had no 
shepherd; 


** Matthew 9:22 — given thee life 


%7 and said to his disciples, The harvest is great, 
and the labourers few. 

38 Ask, therefore, from the Lord of the harvest, 
that he would thrust forth labourers into his 
harvest. 


10:1 And he called his twelve disciples, and 
gave them power over unclean spirits to cast 
them out, and to cure every disease and 
infirmity. 

? Now, of the twelve apostles the names are 
these: the first of them, Shemun who is called 
Kipha, and Andreas his brother, and Jakub-bar- 
Zabdai, and Juchanon his brother, 

? and Philipos, and Bar-Tholmai, and Thoma, 
and Mathai the tribute-gatherer, and Jakubbar- 
Chalphai, and Labi who was surnamed Thadai, 

and Shemun the zealous”, and Jihuda 
S’carjuta, he who betrayed him. 

These twelve Jeshu sent, and commanded 
them and said, In the way of the heathens go 
not, and into the city of the Shomroyee do not 
enter; 

ê but go rather unto the sheep which have 
perished from the house of Isroel. 

And as you go, proclaim and say that the 
kingdom of heaven hath drawn near. 
® The diseased heal, the lepers cleanse, the 
dead raise, and the demons cast forth. 

* Freely you have received, freely give. 

10 Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in 
your purses, nor a wallet for the road; neither 
two tunics, nor sandals, nor staff: for worthy is 
the workman of his meat. 

11 And into whatsoever city or town you enter, 
inquire who is worthy in it, and there be till you 
depart. 

12 And when you enter into the house, invoke 
peace for the house’: 

13 and if the house be worthy, your peace shall 
come upon it; but if it be not worthy, your peace 
upon yourselves shall revert. 

14 But whosoever doth not receive you or hear 
your words, when you depart from that house, or 
that town, set free the dust from your feet. 

15 And, Amen, I say unto you, that for the land 
of Sadum and of Amura it will be more tolerable, 
in the day of the judgment, than for that city. 

Lo, | send you forth as sheep among wolves: 
be you, therefore, wise as serpents and 
guileless as doves. 


235 Matthew 10:4 — Kenanaia, or Canaanite 
7° Matthew 10:12 — pray for the peace of the house 


17 But beware of the sons of men; for, delivering 
you to the house of judgments, in their 
synagogues they will scourge you, 

"8 and before governors and kings bring you, on 
my account, for the testimony concerning them 
and the gentiles. 

19 But when they deliver you up, be not 
solicitous how or what you shall speak; for it is 
given you in that hour what you shall speak. 

For it is not you speaking, but the Spirit of 
your Father speaking in you. 

2" But the brother shall deliver his brother unto 
death, and the father his son; and the sons shall 
rise up against their fathers, and shall slay them. 
22 And you shall be abhorred by all men on 
account of my name: but he who shall persevere 
until the end, he shall be saved”. 

?3 When they persecute you in this city, escape 
to the other; for, Amen I say unto you, that you 
shall not have completed all the cities of the 
house of Isroel, till the Son of man shall come. 
* The disciple is not greater than his master, 
nor the servant than his lord. 

*° It sufficeth the disciple that he be as his 
master, and the servant as his lord. If the master 
of the house they have called Beelzebub, how 
much more his house-sons! 

*® You shall not fear, therefore, from them; for 
there is nothing covered which shall not be 
revealed, nor secret which shall not be known. 

*7 Whatsoever I say to you in darkness, declare 
you in the light; and whatsoever you have heard 
in your ears, proclaim upon the [house]-roofs. 

?8 And fear not them who kill the body, but the 
soul cannot kill; but fear rather One who the soul 
and the body can destroy in gihano. 

*° Are not two sparrows sold for an asor?” yet 
one of them, without your Father, doth not fall 
upon the earth. 

°° But of you, also, the hairs of your head are all 
numbered. 

31 Fear not, therefore; than many sparrows 
more precious are you. 

Every man, therefore, who shall confess me 
before the sons of men, | myself will confess him 
also before my Father who is in heaven. 

But whosoever shall deny me before the sons 
of men, | also will deny him, I, before my Father 
who is in heaven. 

%4 Expect not that | have come to send forth 
peace on the earth; | have not come to send 
forth peace, but the sword. 


77 Matthew 10:22 — shall live 
8 Matthew 10:29 — the assarius, value three 
farthings 


35 For | have come to cause a man to separate 
from his father”, and a daughter from her 
mother, and a daughter-in-law from her mother- 
in-law; 

°° and the adversaries of a man (to be) his own 
house-sons. 

37 Whosoever loveth father or mother more than 
me is not worthy (of) me; and whosoever loveth 
son or daughter more than me is not worthy (of) 
me. 

38 And every one who taketh not his cross and 
cometh after me, is not worthy of me. 

°° Whosoever will find his life shall lose it, and 
whosoever shall lose his life for my sake shall 
find it. 

“° Whosoever receiveth you, receiveth me; and 
whosoever receiveth me, Him who sent me he 
receiveth. 

1 Whosoever entertaineth a prophet in the 

name of a prophet, the reward of a prophet 
receiveth. Whosoever entertaineth a just man in 
the name of a just man, the reward of the just 
man he receiveth. 
42 And whosoever only giveth one of these little 
ones a cup of cold (waters) to drink in the name 
of a disciple, Amen, | say unto you, he shall not 
lose his reward. 


11:1 And it was that when Jeshu had finished 
instructing his twelve disciples, he removed from 
thence to teach and preach in their cities. 

? But Juchanon, when he heard in the house of 
the bound the works of the Meshicha, sent by 
his disciples, 

? and said to him, Art thou He that cometh, or 
another are we to expect? 

* Jeshu answered and said to them, Go, 
recount to Juchanon these things which you 
hear and see; 

° (that) the blind see, the lame are walking, the 
lepers are made clean, the deaf hear, the dead 
arise, and the poor are evangelized; 

ê and blessed is he who shall not be offended 
with me. 

’ But when they were gone, Jeshu began to 
speak to the assembly concerning Juchanon: 
What went you forth into the waste to see? a 
reed that by the wind was shaken? 

And if not, what went you forth to see? a man 
clothed in soft vestments? Behold, they who are 
softly clothed are in the house of kings. 

* And if not, what went you forth to see? A 
prophet? | tell you, Yes; and more than a 
prophet. 


? Matthew 10:35 — divide against 


10 For this is he concerning whom it is written, 
Behold, | send my angel before thy face, to 
prepare the way before thee. 

" Amen | say to you, there hath not arisen 
among them born of women [one] who [is] 
greater than Juchanon the Baptizer: yet, the 
least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than 
he. 

12 But from the days of Juchanon the Baptizer 
until now, the kingdom of the heavens by 
violence is taken, and the violent ones seize it. 

13 For all the prophets and the law prophesied” 
until Juchanon; 

and if you are willing, receive, that he is Elia 
who was to come. 

15 Whoever hath ears to hear, he shall hear. 

16 But to what shall | compare this generation? It 
is like children who sit in the public place, and 
cry to their companions, 

17 and say, We have sung to you, and you have 
not danced; we have wailed unto you, and you 
have not mourned. 

18 Eor Juchanon came neither eating nor 
drinking, and they say, He hath a devil. 

19 The Son of man came eating and drinking, 
and they say, See a man a devourer, a wine- 
drinker, a friend of tribute-takers and of sinners. 
But justified is wisdom by her servants. 

20 Then began Jeshu to reproach those cities in 
which were done many of his miracles, and 
which did not repent, 

?1 saying, Woe to thee, Korazin! woe to thee, 
Bethsaida! for if in Tsur and in Tsaidon those 
miracles had been done which have been 
performed in you, they would a while ago in 
sackcloth and ashes have repented. 

?? But | say to you, that for Tsur and Tsaidon it 
shall be more tolerable in the day of judgment 
than for you. 

*8 And thou, Kapher-nachum, who unto heaven 
art exalted, unto Shiul shalt be brought down; for 
if in Sadum had been done those miracles which 
have been done in thee, it would have stood 
until this day. 

** But I tell you that for the land of Sadum it 
shall be more tolerable?" in the day of judgment 
than for thee. 

*° In that time Jeshu answered and said, | 
praise thee, my Father, the Lord of the heavens 
and of the earth, that thou hast concealed these 
(things) from the wise and prudent [ones], but 
hast revealed them unto little children. 


3 Matthew 11:13 — were prophetic 
31 Matthew 11:24 - Or, tranquil 


?8 Ves, my Father, for thus was it pleasing 
before thee! 

*7 All things are delivered to me from my Father; 
and no man knoweth the Son but the Father; 
also the Father no man knoweth, except the 
Son, and he (to) whom the Son pleaseth to 
reveal (him). 

8 Come unto me, all you (who) are wearied and 
bearing burdens, and | will give you rest. 

*° Bear my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for | 
am peaceful and lowly in my heart, and you shall 
find repose for your souls. 

2 For my yoke is kindly, and my burden is light. 


12:1 At that time Jeshu was walking on the 
sabbath among the grain; and his disciples 
hungered, and began to pluck the ears and to 
eat. 

? But when the Pharishee saw them, they say to 
him, Look, thy disciples do something which is 
not lawful to be done on the sabbath. 

3 But he said to them, Have you not read what 
David did when he hungered, and they who 
were with him? 

how he went to the house of Aloha, and the 
bread of the table of the Lorp did he eat,---that 
which was not lawful for him to eat, nor for them 
who were with him, but for the priests only? 

° Or have you not read in the law that the 
priests in the temple profane the sabbath in it, 
and are without blame? 

ê But | say to you, that (one) greater than the 
temple is here. 

7 Moreover, if you knew what that (meaneth), " | 
desire mercy and not a sacrifice," you would not 
have condemned them who are not faulty. 

è For the Lord of the sabbath is the Son of man. 
? And Jeshu passed thence, and came into their 
synagogue. 

1° And a certain man was there whose hand 
was withered. And they questioned him, saying, 
Is it lawful on the sabbath to heal? that they 
might accuse him. 

But he said to them, What man is there 
among you that hath one sheep, (who), if it fall 
into a pit on the sabbath-day, doth not take and 
lift it up? 

12 How much more precious is a child of man 
than a sheep! Wherefore it is lawful on the 
sabbath-day to do that which is good. 

13 Then saith he to the man, Stretch forth thine 
hand! and he stretched forth his hand, and it 
was restored like the other its fellow. 


32 Matthew 12:1 - Or, in the place of seeds 


14 And the Pharishee went forth and took 
counsel against him, how they might destroy 
him. 

15 But Jeshu knew, and passed from thence; 
and great crowds went after him, and he healed 
them all. 

16 And he forbad that they should make him 
known. 

17 That what was spoken by the prophet Eshaia 
might be fulfilled, who said, 

18 Behold my servant, in whom is my pleasure: 
My beloved, in whom my soul delighteth. My 
Spirit will | put upon him, And judgment to the 
peoples shall he preach. 

? He shall not contend nor cry, And no man 
shall hear his voice in the street. 

20 A bruised reed he will not break, And a 
flickering lamp he will not extinguish, Until he 
bring forth judgment unto victory. 

And in his name shall the gentiles hope. 

2? Then they brought to him a certain demoniac 
who was dumb and blind; and he healed him, so 
that the dumb and blind could speak and see. 

?3 And all the multitude were amazed, and said, 
Is not this the Son of David? 

?4 But the Pharishee, when they heard, said, 
This (man) doth not cast forth demons unless by 
Beelzebub, the prince of the devils. 

*° But Jeshu knew their reasonings, and said to 
them, Every kingdom that is divided against 
itself is destroyed; and every city which is 
divided against itself shall not stand. 

*° And if Satan? cast out Satan, he is divided 
against himself; how then standeth his kingdom? 
*’ And if | by Beelzebub cast forth demons, your 
sons, by whom do they cast them forth? On this 
account they shall be your judges. 

?8 But if | by the Spirit of Aloha cast forth 
demons, the kingdom of Aloha hath come nigh 
upon you. 

*° Or, how can one enter the strong one’s 
house, and spoil his goods, unless he first bind 
the strong one? and then can he spoil his house. 

He who is not with me is against me; and he 
who gathereth not with me, in scattering 
scattereth. 

Wherefore, this | say to you: That all sins and 
blasphemies shall be forgiven unto the sons of 
men; but the blasphemy which is against the 
Spirit shall not be forgiven to the sons of men. 

32 And every one who shall speak a word 
against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him; 
but every one who against the Spirit of Holiness 


3 Matthew 12:26 - Satana 


shall speak, it shall not be forgiven to him, 
neither in this world nor in the world to come. 

33 Or make the tree good, and the fruits (will be) 
good; or make the tree evil, and the fruits (will 
be) evil: for by the fruits the tree is known. 

* Brood of vipers! how can you speak good 
who are evil? For from the abundancies of the 
heart the mouth speaketh. 

°° A good man from the good treasuries 
bringeth forth good things, and an evil man out 
of the evil treasuries bringeth forth evil (things). 
°° But I tell you, that for every useless word 
which the sons of men shall speak, they must 
give the answer for it in the day of judgment. 

For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and 
by thy words thou shalt be condemned. 

Then answered certain from the scribes and 
Pharishee, and said to him, Teacher, we would 
wish to see a sign from thee. 

But he answered them and said, A generation 
depraved and adulterous requireth a sign; but a 
sign shall not be given to it, but the sign of 
Jaunon the prophet; 

for as Jaunon was in the belly of the fish 
three days and three nights, so the Son of man 
shall be in the heart of the earth three days and 
three nights. 

“' The men of Ninevoé. shall rise up in the 
judgment with this generation, and shall 
condemn it; for they repented at the preaching of 
Jaunon; and, behold, a greater than Jaunon (is) 
here. 

“ The queen of the south shall arise in the 
judgment with this generation, and shall 
condemn it; for she came from the confines of 
the earth that she might hear the wisdom of 
Shelemun; but one more excellent than 
Shelemun is here. 

“8 When the unclean spirit shall have gone forth 
from a child of man, he wandereth through 
places that have no waters in them, and seeketh 
repose, but findeth (it) not. 

44 Then he saith, | will return unto the house 
from whence | came forth; and coming, he 
findeth it untenanted, cleansed, and decorated. 

Then he goeth and taketh with him seven 
other spirits, than himself more wicked, and they 
enter and dwell in him. And the end of that man 
is worse than his beginning. So shall it be with 
this wicked race! 

4 While he spake to the assembly, his mother 
and his brethren came, standing without, and 
seeking to speak with him. 

7 And a man said to him, Thy mother and thy 
brethren are standing without, and are 
requesting to speak with thee. 


“8 But he answered and said to him who spake 
to him, Who is my mother, and who are my 
brethren? 

“8 And he stretched forth his hand towards his 
disciples, and said, Behold my mother, and 
behold my brethren! 

°° For every one who doeth the will of my Father 
who is in heaven, he is my brother, and my 
sister, and my mother. 


13:1 In that day Jeshu went forth from the house 
and sat by the sea-side;** 

? and great multitudes gathered near him, so 
that he went up and sat in a vessel; and all the 
multitude were standing on the shore of the sea. 

3 And he discoursed largely to them in parables, 
and said: Behold, there went forth a sower to 
SOW; 

* and as he sowed, some fell by the road-side, 
and the fowl came and devoured it. 

° Another (portion) fell upon the rock, wee 
there was not much soil; and immediately” 
sprung up, because there was no depth of aah 

But when the sun was risen, it burned, and, 
because it had no root, it withered away. 

And another fell among the thorns, and the 
thorns sprang up and choked it. 

è And another fell into good earth, and gave 
fruits, this a hundred, another sixty, and another 
thirty. 

? He who hath ears to hear, let him hear. 

1° And his disciples approached, saying to him, 
Why dost thou speak to them in parables? 

" He replied and said to them, Because unto 
you it is given to know the mystery of the 
kingdom of heaven, but unto them it is not given. 

? For unto him who hath, it shall be given, and 
it shall be increased to him: 

° but [as] to him who hath not, that also which 
he hath shall be taken from him. On this account 
| speak to them in parables. Hence they see, 
and (yet) see not; and they hear, and (yet) hear 
not, neither understand; 

and accomplished in them is the prophecy of 
Eshaia, who said, that hearing they should hear, 
but not understand, and seeing they should see, 
but not know. 

15 For the heart of this people is become gross, 
and with their ears they have heard heavily, and 
their eyes they have shut, that they may not see 
with their eyes, nor hear with their ears, nor 
understand with their hearts, and be converted, 
and | heal them. 


34 Matthew 13:1 - By the hand of the sea 
3 Matthew 13:5 - Bar-shoteh, " the son of its hour" 


'© But blessed are your eyes which see, and 
your ears which hear: 

17 for, Amen I say unto you, that many prophets 
and just ones have desired to behold what you 
see, and have not beheld, and to hear what you 
hear, and have not heard. 

18 You, then, attend to the comparison of the 
seed: 

19 (When) any one who heareth the doctrine of 
the kingdom doth not understand it, there 
cometh the evil (one), and snatcheth away the 
doctrine that was sown in his heart: this is what 
by the road-side was sown. 

*° But that which was sown upon the rock is he 
who heareth the word, and at once with joy 
apprehendeth it. 

21 Yet hath he no root in him, but is (only) for a 
time; and when affliction or persecution occurs 
on account of the doctrine, he is quickly 
offended. 

” That sown [in] the place of thorns, is he who 
heareth the word, but the anxious thought of this 
world and the illusions of riches stifle the word in 
him, and he is without fruits. 

?3 But that which upon good ground was sown 
is he who heareth my doctrine, and 
understandeth (it), and giveth fruits, and 
produceth, whether a hundred, or sixty, or thirty 
fold. 

*4 Another comparison he allegorized unto 
them, and said: The kingdom of heaven is like 
unto a man who sowed good seed in his field. 
*° And while men slept, came his adversary, 
and sowed zizania among the wheat, and went. 
6 And when the plant sprang up and produced 
fruit, then appeared the zizania. 

*7 And the labourers of the house-lord drew 
near and said to him, Our lord, didst thou not 
sow good seed in thy field? From whence then 
is the zizania in it? 

?8 But he said to them, A foeman hath done this. 
The labourers say to him, Art thou willing that we 
go and gather them? 

But he said to them, (No,) lest, when ye 
gather the zizania, you root out with them the 
wheat also. 

3 Leave (them), that both may grow together till 
the harvest; and in the season of harvest | will 
say to the reapers, Gather first the zizania, and 
bind them (together in) bundles, that they may 
burn; but the wheat collect into my barns. 

31 Another comparison allegorized he to them, 
and said: The kingdom of heaven is like a grain 
of mustard, which a man took and sowed in his 
field. 


32 This is less than all other seeds; but when it 
has grown, it is greater than all herbs, and 
becometh a tree, so that the fowl of the heavens 
come (and) build in its branches. 

33 Another parable he spake to them: The 
kingdom of heaven resembles that leaven which 
a woman took and hid in three satas*° of meal, 
until the whole was leavened. 

34 All these spake Jeshu in parables to the 
multitude; and without a parable he did not 
speak with them. 

° That there should be fulfilled what was 
spoken by the prophet, who said, | will open my 
mouth in comparisons, and pour forth things 
hidden from before the foundation of the world. 
°° Then Jeshu dismissed the multitudes, and 
came into the house; and his disciples drew 
near him, and said to him, Expound to us the 
comparison of the zizania of the field. 

He answered and said to them, He who 
sowed the good seed is the Son of man. 

38 The field is the world. Now, the good seed 
are the sons of the kingdom, but the zizania are 
the sons of the evil one. 

The adversary who sowed them is Satana; 
the harvest is the consummation of the world; 
the reapers are the angels. 

“° As, therefore, the zizania are gathered and 
burned in the fire, so shall it be in the completion 
of this world. 

“' The Son of man shall send forth his angels, 
and they shall collect from his kingdom all those 
who cause offence, and all (who) work iniquity, 
“2 and shall throw them into a furnace of fire: 
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. 

43 Then the just shall shine forth as the sun in 
the kingdom of their Father. He who hath ears to 
hear, let him hear. 

Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a 
treasure which was hidden in a field, (and) which 
a man found and concealed, and from joy went 
and sold all that he had, and bought that field. 

° Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a 
man a merchant, who sought goodly pearls; but 
who, 

“6 when he had found one pearl of exceeding 
price, went, sold all that he had, and bought it. 
“7 again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a 
net, which was thrown into the sea, and from 
every kind collected. 

“8 And when it was full, they drew to the shore, 
and sat down, and selected; and the good they 


3€ Matthew 13:33 - The sea, or sata, was the third of 
an ephah 


threw into vessels, and the bad they cast 
without. 

“° Thus shall it be at the consummation of the 
world. The angels shall go forth, and separate 
the evil from among the just, 

°° and cast them into the furnace of fire; there 
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth! 

51 Jeshu said to them, Have you understood all 
these? They say to him, Yes, our Lord. 

°? He saith to them, On this account every 
scribe who is learned in the kingdom of heaven, 
is like to a man a house-lord, who bringeth forth 
from his treasuries the new and the old. 

°8 And when Jeshu had finished these parables, 
he passed from thence, 

54 and came to his city, and taught them in their 
synagogues, so that they were astounded and 
said, Whence hath he (Whence to him) this 
wisdom and these powers? 

Is not this the son of the carpenter? Is not his 
mother called Mariam, and his brothers, Jakub, 
and Josi, and Shemun, and Jehuda? 

and his sisters, all, are they not with us? 
Whence to this one all these? And they were 
offended with him. 
°” But Jeshu said to them, No prophet is 
contemned except in his own city, and in his 
own house. 
°8 And he did not many miracles there on 
account of their unbelief. 


14:1 In that time Herodes Tetrarka heard the 
rumour concerning Jeshu; 
? and he said to his servants, This is Juchanon 
the Baptizer: he hath risen from the house of the 
dead, therefore powerful works are wrought by 
him. 
3 For he, Herodes, had seized Juchanon, and 
bound him, and cast him (into) the house of the 
chained, because of Herodia the wife of Philip 
his brother. 

For Juchanon had said to him, It is not lawful 
that she should be to thee a wife. 

And he would have killed him, but he feared 
the people, because as a prophet they held him. 
ê But at the birth-day of Herodes, the daughter 
of Herodia danced before those who reclined, 
and she pleased Herodes; 

wherefore with an oath he sware to her to give 
her whatever she should demand. 
® Then she, because instructed by her mother, 
said, Give me here in a dish the head of 
Juchanon the Baptizer. 
* And the king sickened, yet, on account of the 
oath and the guests, he commanded that it 
should be given to her. 


10 And he sent [and] cut off the head of 
Juchanon in the house of the chained. 

1! And his head was brought in a dish, and 
given to the girl, and she carried it herself to her 
mother. 

12 And his disciples came near, took up his 
corpse, buried (it), and came and showed 
Jeshu. 

13 Then Jeshu, when he heard, removed from 
thence by ship to a desert place by himself; and 
when the multitude heard it, they came after him 
on dry land from the cities. 

14 And Jeshu came forth, and saw great 
multitudes, and felt compassion for them, and 
healed their diseases. 

° But when it was eventide, his disciples 
approached him, and said to him, The place is 
desert, and the time passed over; send away 
these multitudes of men, that they may go to the 
villages, and buy for themselves food. 

16 But he said to them, It is not needful that they 
should go; give you them to eat. 

7 They said to him, We have nothing here but 
five cakes and two fishes. 

è Jeshu said to them, Bring them hither to me. 

And he directed the multitudes to recline 
upon the ground; and he took the five loaves 
and two fishes, and looked up to heaven, and 
blessed, and brake, and gave to his disciples, 
and the disciples themselves placed (it) before 
the multitudes. 

20 And all did eat, and were satisfied; and they 
took up, of the abundance of the fragments, 
twelve baskets when full. 

21 Now those men who had eaten were five 
thousand, besides women and children. 

*? And immediately he constrained his disciples 
to ascend into the bark, and proceed before him 
to the other shore, while he was dismissing the 
crowds. 

?3 And when he had sent the multitudes away, 
he went up to a mountain by himself, to pray. 
And when it was dark, he alone was there. 

?4 But the vessel was distant from the land 
many stadia, being greatly beaten with the 
waves, for the wind was against them. 

*° But in the fourth watch of the night, Jeshu 
came to them, walking upon the waters. 

76 And the disciples beheld him walking on the 
waters, and they were troubled, saying, That it 
was a spectre;? and from fear they cried out. 

? But Jeshu at once spoke to them, and said, 
Take courage, | am, fear not! 


37 Matthew 14:26 - Or, a false vision 


?8 And Kipha answered, and said to him, My 
Lord, if it be thou, command me to come to thee 
upon the waters. 
*° Jeshu said to him, Come. And Kipha 
descended from the ship, and walked on the 
waters to go to Jeshu. 
°° But when he saw the furious wind, he feared, 
and began to sink; and he lifted up his voice, 
and said, My Lord, deliver me! 
31 And immediately our Lord reached forth his 
hand, and seized him, and said to him, Little of 
faith, why art thou divided (in mind)? 
32 And when they had ascended into the ship, 
the wind was tranquil. 
33 And they who were in the ship, came and 
adored him, and said, Truly the Son thou art of 
Aloha. 
34 And they rowed, and came to the land of 
Genésar; 
°° and the men of that country recognized him, 
and sent to all the villages that were about them, 
and they brought to him all those who were 
grievously afflicted 

and besought from him that they might touch 
only the border of his mantle; and those who 
touched were healed. 


15:1 Then came to Jeshu Pharishee and 
Sophree,”® who were from Urishlem, saying, 
? Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of 
the elders, and wash not their hands when they 
eat bread? 
° Jeshu answered, and said to them, Why also 
do ye transgress the commandment of Aloha for 
the sake of your tradition? 
* For Aloha hath said, Honour thy father and thy 
mother; and whoso curseth his father or his 
mother, to die he shall die: 
° but ye say, Every one who shall say toa 
father, or to a mother, (It is) my oblation 
whatever thou wouldst be profited by me, and 
shall not honour his father or his mother (shall 
be guiltless). 

Thus you have abolished the word of Aloha for 
the sake of your tradition. 

Ye hypocrites! rightly prophesied concerning 
you Eshaia the prophet, and said, 

This people with the lips honour me, but their 
heart (is) very far from me. 

But in vain they reverence me, while they 
teach the doctrines of the commandments of 
men.” 


38 Matthew 15:1 - Scribes 
3 Matthew 15:9 — Sons of men 


10 And he called to the multitudes, and said to 
them, Hear, and understand: 

"It is not that which, entering the mouth, 
contaminates a man; but that which shall come 
from the mouth, that contaminates a man. 

12 Then drew near his disciples, saying to him, 
Knowest thou that the Pharishee who heard this 
word were offended? 

13 But he answered, and said to them, Every 
plantation which my Father who is in heaven 
hath not planted shall be rooted up. 

14 Leave them: they are blind leaders of the 
blind; but if a blind man shall lead a blind man, 
both shall fall into the ditch. 

15 And Shemun Kipha answered and said, My 
Lord, expound to us this parable. 

ê But he said to them, Do you also not yet 
understand? 

7 Know you not that whatsoever entereth the 
mouth, goeth into the belly, and from thence in 
purification it is cast without? 

18 But whatsoever from the mouth shall come 
forth, from the heart cometh forth, and this [it is 
that] contaminates a child of man. 

For from the heart proceed evil thoughts, 
adultery, murder, fornication, robbery, false 
witness, blasphemy. 

2 These are they which defile a man; but if any 
one eat when his hands are not washed, he is 
not defiled. 

?1 And Jeshu went forth from thence, and came 
to the borders of Tsur and Tsaidon. 

22 And, beheld, a Canaanite woman from those 
coasts came forth crying, and saying, Have 
mercy upon me, my Lord, son of David! my 
daughter is grievously possessed with the 
demon! 

?3 But he did not return her an answer. And the 
disciples approached and requested from him, 
saying, Dismiss her, for she crieth after us. 

** But he answered and said to them, | am not 
sent but to the sheep which have wandered from 
the house of Israel. 

Then she came, worshipped him, and said, 
My Lord, help me! 
© Jeshu said to her, It is not proper to take the 
children’s bread and throw it to the dogs. 

? But she said, Even so, my Lord; yet the dogs 
eat from the crumbs that fall from the tables of 
their masters, and live. 

?8 Then said Jeshu to her, O woman, great is 
thy faith! be it to thee as thou wilt! And healed 
was her daughter from that hour. 

*° And Jeshu passed from thence, and came 
near the sea of Galila; and he ascended the 
mountain and sat there. 


°° And there drew near to him great gatherings 
(of people), and with them there were the lame, 
and the blind, and the dumb, and the mutilated, 
and many others; and they cast them at the feet 
of Jeshu, and he healed them. 

31 So that those multitudes were astounded as 
they beheld the dumb speaking, and the 
mutilated made whole, and the lame walking, 
and the blind seeing; and they glorified the 
Aloha of Isroel. 

32 But Jeshu himself called his disciples, and 
said to them, | have pity for this multitude, who, 
behold, for three days have continued with me, 
but there is nothing for them to eat; and to send 
them away fasting, | am unwilling, lest they 
should faint in the way. 

33 The disciples say to him, Whence can we 
have bread in the wilderness, that we may 
satisfy this whole multitude? 

Jeshu saith to them, How many loaves have 
you? They say to him, Seven, and a few small 
fishes. 

3 And he directed that the multitudes should 
recline upon the ground. 

38 And he took those seven loaves and the 
fishes, and offered praise, and brake, and gave 
to his disciples, and the disciples gave to the 
multitudes; 

37 and they all did eat and were satisfied: and 
they took up of the abundance of fragments 
seven baskets full. 

38 And they who had eaten, were four thousand 
men, besides women and children. 

°° And when he had dismissed the multitudes, 
he ascended into a ship, and came to the coasts 
of Magodu. 


16:1 And there came Pharishee and Zadukoyee, 
tempting him, and demanding that he would 
show them a sign from heaven. 

? But he answered and said to them, When it is 
evening, you say, It will be serene weather, for 
the heaven hath reddened. 

And in the early morning you say, To-day will 
be tempestuous, for the heaven hath reddened 
gloomily. Hypocrites! the aspect of the heaven 
you are skilful to discriminate, (but) the signs of 
this time you know not how to distinguish. 

* A depraved and adulterous race requireth a 
sign, but a sign shall not be given to it, save the 
sign of Jaunon the prophet; and he left them, 
and went away. 

° And when his disciples had come to the 
opposite [shore], they had forgotten to take 
bread with them. 


ê But he said to them, Take heed and beware of 
the leaven of the Pharishee and Zadukoyee. 

7 But they thought within themselves, saying, (It 
is) because bread we have not taken. 

ê But Jeshu knew, and said to them, Why 
reason you within yourselves, little in faith, 
because bread you have not brought? 

? Have you not yet understood? Do you not 
remember those five loaves for the five 
thousand, and how many panniers you took up? 

1° Or those seven loaves and the four thousand, 
and how many baskets you took up? 

i Why do you not understand that it was not 
concerning bread | spoke to you, but that you 
should beware of the leaven of the Pharishee 
and of the Zadukoyee? 

? Then they understood that he did not say that 
they should beware of the leaven of bread, but 
of the doctrine of the Pharishee and of the 
Zadukoyee. 

13 Now when Jeshu had come to the place of 
Cesarea of Philipos, he questioned his disciples, 
saying, What do men say concerning me who 
am the Son of man? 

i They said to him, Some say that thou art 
Juchanon the Baptizer, but others Elia, and 
others Eramia, or one from the prophets. 

15 He saith to them, But you, whom say you that 
lam? 
1€ Shemun Kipha answered and said, Thou art 
the Meshicha, Son of Aloha the Living. 

17 Jeshu responded and said to him, Blessed art 
thou, Shemun-bar-Jona; because flesh and 
blood have not revealed (this) to thee, but my 
Father who is in heaven. 

18 Also I say unto thee, that thou art Kipha, and 
upon this rock will | build my church, and the 
gates of Sheul shall not prevail against her. 

19 To thee will | give the keys of the kingdom of 
heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt bind on 
earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever 
thou shalt loose on earth, shall be loosed in 
heaven. 

20 Then he commanded his disciples that no 
man they should tell that he was the Meshicha. 
?1 And from that time began Jeshu to show to 
his disciples that it was to be that he should go 
to Urishlem, and suffer much from the elders 
and the chief priests and scribes, and be slain, 
and the third day arise again. 

?2 Then Kipha took him (apart?) and began to 
expostulate with him, and said, Far be it from 
thee, my Lord, that this should be to thee! 

?3 But he turned and said to Kipha, Get thee 
behind me, Satana! thou art a stumbling-block to 


me, because thou thinkest not from Aloha, but 
from the sons of men! 

4 Then said Jeshu to his disciples. Whosoever 
willeth to come after me, let him deny himself, 
and let him take up his cross and follow me. 

?5 For whosoever willeth to save his life, shall 
lose it; and whosoever will lose his life for my 
sake, shall find it. 

°° For what shall a man be profited, if the whole 
world he shall acquire, and his soul shall perish? 
or what equivalent shall a man give for his soul? 
?7 For it is to be, that the Son of man shall come 
in the glory of his Father with his holy angels, 
and then shall he render unto every man 
according to his works. 

?8 Amen, | say unto you, There are men 
standing here who shall not taste death, until 
they shall have seen the Son of man coming in 
his kingdom. 


17:1 And after six days, Jeshu took Kipha, and 
Jakub, and Juchanon his brother, and led them 
to a high mountain by themselves. 

? And Jeshu was changed before them; and his 
countenance shone like the sun, and his 
vestments were resplendent as the light. 

And there were seen with them Musha and 

Elia talking with him. 

“Then answered Kipha, and said to Jeshu, My 
Lord, it is good for us to be here; and if thou art 
willing, we will make here three tabernacles; one 
for thee, and one for Musha, and one for Elia. 

° But while he spake, behold, a bright cloud 
overspread them, and the voice was from the 
cloud, saying, This is my Son, the Beloved, in 
whom | have delighted: to him attend. 

ê And when the disciples heard, they fell upon 
their faces and feared greatly. 

7 And Jeshu approached them and touched 
them, and said, Arise, fear not. 

è And they lifted up their eyes and saw no man, 
except Jeshu by himself. 

* And while they were descending from the 
mountain, Jeshu charged them, and said to 
them, Before no man declare this vision, until 
the Son of man be risen from the dead. 

10 And the disciples asked and said to him, Why 
therefore say the scribes that Elia must come 
first? 

11 Jeshu answered and said to them, Elia 
cometh first that he may fulfil every thing; 


“° Matthew 17:9a - To the eye of man tell not this 
vision 
^t Matthew 17:9b - From (among) the dead: plural 


1? but | say to you, that, behold, Elia hath come, 
but they knew him not, and have done to him as 
they would. So also is the Son of man to suffer 
from them. 

13 Then understood the disciples that 
concerning Juchanon the Baptizer he spake to 
them. 

14 And when they came to the multitude, a man 
approached him and kneeled upon his knees, 

15 and said to him, My Lord, have mercy on me! 
my son is lunatic and grievously afflicted; for 
often he falleth into the fire and often into the 
water. 

16 And | brought him to thy disciples, but they 
could not heal him. 

7 Jeshu answered and said, O unbelieving and 
perverse generation! how long shall | be with 
you, how long shall | bear with you? Bring him 
hither to me. 

18 And Jeshu rebuked him, and the demon went 
forth from him, and the youth was healed from 
that hour. 

19 Then came the disciples to Jeshu by himself, 
and said to him, Why were we not able to heal 
him? 

2 Jeshu saith to them, Because of your 
unbelief; for assuredly | tell you, if there were in 
you faith as a grain of mustard, you should say 
to this mountain, Pass hence, and it would pass 
away; and nothing should overcome you. 

?1 But this kind goeth not forth but by fasting 
and by prayer. 

?? When they had returned into Galila, Jeshu 
said to them, It is coming that the Son of man 
shall be delivered into the hands of men, 

*° and they shall kill him; and in the third day he 
shall arise. And it grieved them exceedingly. 

24 And when they came to Kapher-nachum, they 
who took the two zuzis, the head-silver, 
approached Kipha and said to him, Your master, 
doth he not give his two zuzeen?”” 

*° He saith to them, Yes. And when Kipha 
entered the house, Jeshu anticipated him, and 
said to him, How doth it appear to thee, 
Shemun? the kings of the earth, from whom do 
they take custom and headsilver, from their 
children, or from aliens? 

8 Shemun saith to him, From aliens: Jeshu 
saith to him, Then the children are free. 

*’ But that we may not offend them, go to the 
sea, and cast the hook; and the fish that first 


42 Matthew 17:24 - The zuz, or zuza, was a silver 
coin, value one drachm. 
“8 Matthew 17:26 — Sons of the free 


cometh up, open his mouth; and thou shalt find 
a stater, that take and present for me and thee. 


18:1 In that hour the disciples came near to 
Jeshu, saying, Who is greatest in the kingdom of 
heaven? 

? And Jeshu called a child, and made him stand 
in the midst of them, 

? and said, Amen | say to you, unless you be 
converted and become as children, you shall not 
enter the kingdom of heaven. 

“ Whosoever therefore humbleth himself as this 
child, he shall be greatest in the kingdom of 
heaven. 

° And whosoever shall receive [such] as [are] 
like this child in my name, he receiveth me. 

ê And every one that shall offend one of these 
little ones who believe in me, to him it had been 
better that the mill-stone of an ass“ were hung 
to his neck, and himself plunged into the depths 
of the sea. 

7 Woe to the world from causes of offence! for it 
is unavoidable that causes of offence will come; 
but woe to the man by whom** the causes of 
offence shall come! 

8 If, then, thine hand or thy foot shall be a cause 
of offence to thee, cut it off, and cast it from 
thee; for it is good for thee that thou enter into 
life“ lame or mutilated; and not that, having two 
hands or two feet, thou fall into the fire of 
eternity. 

* And if thine eye be a cause of offence to thee, 
dig it out, and cast it from thee; good (it is) for 
thee that with one eye thou enter into life; and 
not that, having two eyes, thou fall into the 
gihana of fire. 

10 See that you contemn not one of these little 
ones: for | say unto you that their angels in all 
time are beholding the face of my Father who is 
in heaven. 

" Eor the Son of man is come to save that 
which had perished. 

12 How doth it appear to you? if a man have an 
hundred sheep, and one of them shall wander 
from them, doth he not leave the ninety and nine 
on the mountain, and, going, seek that which 
had wandered? 

13 And if he shall find it, assuredly | tell you that 
he rejoiceth in it more than (in) the ninety and 
nine which wandered not. 


“4 Matthew 18:6 - That is, the stone of a mill worked 
by an ass or mule 

4 Matthew 18:7 — By whose hand 

“© Matthew 18:8 - Lives 


14 So it is not good*” before your Father who is 
in heaven, that one of these little ones should 
perish. 

15 Now if thy brother offend against thee, go, 
and argue (the matter) between thyself and him 
alone; and if he hear thee, thou hast gained thy 
brother. 

16 But if he hear thee not, take with thee one or 
two, that upon the mouth of two or three 
witnesses may be established every word. 

17 And if, also, he will not hear them, tell the 
church; but if he will neither hear the church, let 
him be to thee as a publican and as a heathen. 

è And, Amen | say unto you, that whatsoever 
you shall bind on earth shall be bound in 
heaven; and whatsoever you shall loose on 
earth shall be loosed in heaven. 

19 Again I say to you, that if two of you shall 
consent on earth concerning every thing that 
they shall ask, it shall be done for them by my 
Father who is in heaven. 

2 Eor where two or three are assembled in my 
name, there am | in the midst of them. 

?1 Then Kipha came near to him, and said to 
him, My Lord, how many times, if my brother 
offend me, shall | forgive him; until seven times? 
22 Jeshu said to him, | say not to thee, Until 
seven, but, Until seventy times seven and 
seven. 

?3 Therefore is the kingdom of the heavens 
likened to a royal person‘? who would take the 
account from his servants. 

24 And when he began to receive, they brought 
to him one who owed a myriad talents. 
2° And when he had nothing to pay, his lord 
commanded that they should sell (both) himself, 
his wife, and his children, and all that he had, 
and to pay. 

*° And that servant fell and worshipped him, 
saying, My lord, be patient of spirit toward me, 
and all things | (will) pay thee. 

77 And the lord of that servant had mercy, and 
absolved him, and forgave him his debt. 

Then went forth that servant, and found one 
of his fellows who owed him a hundred pence; 
and he seized him, strangling, and saying to 
him, Give me what thou owest to me. 

*° His fellow-servant fell at his feet, beseeching 
him, and saying, Be patient of spirit towards me, 
and | (will) pay thee. 
°° But he would not, but went and threw him into 
the house of the chained until he should have 
rendered him what he owed him. 


“ Matthew 18:14 - Ad lit., "The will" 
“8 Matthew 18:23 — A mana king 


31 When their fellow-servants saw what was 
done, they were greatly grieved, and went and 
declared to their lord all that was done. 

32 Then his lord summoned him and said to him, 
Evil servant! all that debt did | forgive thee, 
because thou didst entreat me. 

33 Qughtest thou not to have been as gracious 
to thy fellow-servant as | was gracious unto 
thee? 

34 And his lord was indignant, and delivered him 
to the tormentors, until he should have paid all 
whatsoever he owed to him. 

°° Thus will your heavenly Father deal with you 
unless you forgive each his brother from your 
heart his trespasses. 


19:1 And it was that when Jeshu had finished 
these words, he removed from Galila and came 
into the confines of Jehud beyond Jurdan. 

And great multitudes came after him, and he 
healed them there. 
3 And the Pharishee approached him, and, 
tempting him, propounded to him whether it was 
lawful for a man to send away his wife for every 
cause. 
“ But he answered and said to them, Have you 
not read that He who created from the 
beginning, male and female hath made them? 
° And he said, On this account a man shall 
leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave 
to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh. 
ê Wherefore they were not [constituted] two, but 
one body. That, therefore, which Aloha hath 
conjoined, man shall not separate. 
’ They said to him, Why then did Musha direct 
that he should give a writing of dismissal and 
send her away? 
® He said to them, Musha, on account of the 
hardness of your heart, permitted you to send 
away your wives; but from the beginning it was 
not so. 
* And I say to you that whosoever shall forsake 
his wife who is not adulterous, and take another, 
committeth adultery; and whosoever taketh the 
deserted one, committeth adultery. 

His disciples say to him, If thus be the case 
between the man and the woman, it is not 
expedient to take a wife. 

But he said to them, Not every man is 
sufficient for this doctrine, but he to whom it is 
given. 

12 For there are some eunuchs who from their 
mother’s womb are born so; and there are some 
eunuchs who by men are made eunuchs; and 
there are eunuchs who have made themselves 
eunuchs on account of the kingdom of heaven. 


Whosoever is capable of receiving (this), let him 
receive (it). 

13 Then they brought to him children, that he 
should put his hand upon them and pray. And 
his disciples forbad them. 

14 But Jeshu himself said, Suffer children to 
come unto me, and forbid them not; for of those 
who are as these, is the kingdom of heaven. 

15 And he put his hand upon them, and went 
thence. 

16 And one came and approached and said to 
him, Good teacher, what of good shall | do, that | 
may have the life of eternity? 

17 But he said to him, Why dost thou call me 
good? none is good but one, Aloha. But if thou 
wilt enter into life, keep the commandments. 

8 He said to him, Which? Jeshu answered him, 
Thou shalt not kill, neither commit adultery, nor 
steal, neither shalt thou witness false testimony; 

and honour thy father and thy mother, and 
love thy neighbour as thyself. 

The young man saith to him, These all have | 
kept from my childhood: how am | deficient? 

*1 Jeshu saith to him, If thou wilt become 
perfect, go, sell thy possession and give to the 
poor, and there shall be for thee a treasure in 
heaven: and come after me. 

?? But he, the young man, heard this word, and 
went away with sadness, for he had great 
property. 

?3 But Jeshu said to his disciples, Amen | say 
unto you, that it is difficult for the rich to enter the 
kingdom of heaven. 

*4 again | say to you, that it is easier for a camel 
to enter through the aperture of a needle, than 
the rich to enter into the kingdom of Aloha. 

*° But the disciples when they heard were 
greatly hurt, saying, Who then can be saved? 

Jeshu, beholding them, said, With the sons of 
men it is not possible; but with Aloha every thing 
is possible. 

*7 Then answered Kipha and said to him, 
Behold, we have abandoned every thing, and 
have come after thee: what then shall there be 
for us? 

28 Jeshu saith to them, Amen | say to you, that 
you who have come after me, in the new world, 
when the Son of man shall sit upon the throne of 
his glory, you also shall sit upon twelve seats, 
and shall judge the twelve tribes of Isroel. 

*° And every man who hath relinquished 
houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or 
mother, or wife, or children, or lands, on account 
of my name, shall receive a hundred-fold, and 
shall inherit the life of eternity, 


°° Many however are first who shall be last, and 
the last first. 


20:1 For the kingdom of heaven is like a man, a 
house-lord, who went forth in the early morn to 
hire labourers for his vinery. 

? And he bargained with the labourers for a 
denarius a day, and sent them into his vinery. 

? And he went forth in three hours, and saw 
others who were standing in the public place 
and unemployed. 

“ And he said to them, Go also you in the 
vinery, and what is suitable | will give you. 

° Then went they. And he went forth again in six 
and nine hours, and did the same. 

ê And about eleven hours he went out, and 
found others who were standing and 
unemployed; and he said to them, Why are you 
standing all the day unemployed? 

They say to him, Because no man hath hired 
us. He saith to them, Go also you into the vinery, 
and whatever is suitable you shall receive. 

ê But when it was evening, the lord of the vinery 
said to the chief of his household, Call the 
workmen and give to them their wages; and 
begin from the last unto the first. 
9 And they came who (had wrought) from 
eleven hours; and they received each a 
denarius. 
1° But when the first came, they expected to 
take more; but they also received each a 
denarius. 
" And when they had received, they murmured 
against the house-lord, 
12 and said, These last have wrought one hour, 
and thou hast made them equal with us, who 
have borne the burden of the day and its heat. 
13 But he answered and said to one of them, My 
friend, | am not unjust towards thee: didst thou 
not bargain with me for a denarius? 
14 Take what is thine and go: I will unto these 
last to give as unto thee. 
15 Is it not lawful for me that whatsoever | am 
willing, | may do with mine own? Is thine eye evil 
because | am good? 
16 Thus the last shall be first, and the first last; 
for many are the called, but few the chosen. 
Now Jeshu was about to go up to Urishlem, 
and he took his twelve disciples by themselves“ 
in the way, and said to them, 
18 Behold, we go up to Urishlem, and the Son of 
man is betrayed to the chief priests and to the 
scribes, and they shall condemn him to the 
death; 


9 


^ Matthew 20:17 - Between him and themselves 


19 and they shall consign him to the Gentiles, 
and they shall mock him, and scourge him, and 
shall crucify him, and on the third day he shall 
arise. 

20 Then came to him the mother of the sons of 
Zabdai, she and her sons, and worshipped him, 
and supplicated a certain thing of him. 
=" But he said to her, What wilt thou? She said 
to him, Declare that these my two sons shall sit, 
one at thy right hand, and one at thy left, in thy 
kingdom. 

22 Jeshu answered and said, You know not 
what you ask: are you able to drink the cup of 
which | am about to drink, or with the baptism 
with which | am baptized will you be baptized? 
They say unto him, We are able! 

?3 He saith to them, My cup you shall drink, and 
with the baptism with which | am baptized you 
shall be baptized: but that you may sit at my 
right hand, and at my left, is not mine to give, 
unless to them for whom it is prepared by my 
Father. 

24 And when the ten heard it, they were 
indignant against those two brothers. 

*° And Jeshu called them, and said to them, 
You know that the princes of the Gentiles are 
their lords, and their great ones exercise power 
over them; 
7° but it shall not be so among you; but whoever 
among you willeth to be great, let him be 
minister to you. 

“7 And whoever among you willeth to be first, let 
him be to you the servant. 

?8 So, the Son of man came not to be served, 
but to serve, and to give his life the redemption 
for many. 

*° And when Jeshu went forth from Jirichu, a 

reat multitude cometh after him. 

° And, behold, two blind men were sitting by 
the side® of the way; and when they heard that 
Jeshu was passing, they gave voice, saying, Be 
merciful upon us, my Lord, Son of David! 

31 But the crowds rebuked them that they 
should be silent; but they lifted up their voice the 
more, saying, Our Lord, be merciful upon us, O 
Son of David! 

32 And Jeshu stood and called them, and said, 
What will you that | should do for you? 

33 They say to him, Our Lord, that our eyes may 
be opened. 

3% And he had compassion on them, and 
touched their eyes, and immediately their eyes 
were opened, and they went after him. 


5 Matthew 20:30 — By the hand of the way 


21:1 And when he drew nigh to Urishlem, and 
had come to Beth-phage, at the mount of Olives, 
Jeshu sent two of his disciples, 

? and said to them, Go to this village which is 
over against you, and you shall at once find an 
ass tied, and her colt with her; loose and bring 
(them) to me. 

3 And if any one say ought to you, say to him 
that it is requested for our Lord, and immediately 
he will send them hither. 

“ But all! this was done that there should be 
fulfilled what was spoken by the prophet, who 
said, 

° Tell you the daughter of Tsheum, Behold, thy 
king cometh to thee, lowly, and riding on an ass, 
and on a colt the foal of an ass. 

ê Then the disciples went, and did as Jeshu had 
commanded them; 

7 and brought the ass and the colt, and laid 
upon the colt their clothes, and Jeshu rode upon 
him. 

è And many of the crowds spread their 
vestments in the way; and others cut down 
branches from the trees, and strewed them in 
the way. 

? But the throngs who went before him, and 
came after him, cried out and said, Ushana to 
the son of David! blessed be He who cometh in 
the name of the Lorp! Ushana in the heights! 

10 And when he had entered Urishlem, the 
whole city was commoved, and said, Who is 
this? 

" But the multitude answered, This is Jeshu, 
the prophet who is from Natsrath of Galila. 

12 And Jeshu went into the temple of Aloha, and 
cast out all those who sold and bought in the 
temple, and overthrew the tables of the money- 
changers, and the seats of those who sold 
doves; 

13 and said to them, It is written, that my house 
shall the house of prayer be called, but ye have 
made it a den of thieves. 

14 And there came to him in the temple the blind 
and the lame, and he healed them. 

15 But when the chief priests and Pharishee saw 
the wondrous things which he did, and the 
children who were crying in the temple, and 
saying, Ushana to the son of David, they were 
displeased with them, 

saying to him, Hearest thou what these say? 
Jeshu saith to them, Yes: have ye not read, that 
from the mouth of children and of babes thou 
hast prepared praise? 


5t Matthew 21:4 — Western Peshitto omits “all” 


17 And he abandoned them, and went forth 
without the city to Bethania, and lodged there. 

18 But in the early morn, as he returned to the 
city, he hungered: 

1% and he saw a certain fig-tree in the way, and 
came to it, but found nothing thereon but leaves 
only; and he said, Let there be no fruit upon thee 
again for ever. And immediately that fig-tree 
withered. 

2 And the disciples saw, and were astonished, 
saying, How in a moment is the fig-tree 
withered! 

?1 Jeshu answered and said to them, Amen | 
say to you, that if faith were in you, and you did 
not hesitate,” you should not only do (as) to this 
fig-tree, but also were you to say to this 
mountain, Be thou lifted up and fall into the sea, 
it should be done. 

?? And whatsoever you shall ask in prayer and 
shall believe, you shall obtain. 

?3 And when Jeshu came to the temple, the 
chief priests and elders of the people 
approached him, while he taught, saying to him, 
By what authority doest thou these things, and 
who gave thee this authority? 

Jeshu answered and said to them, | will also 
ask you one word; and if you will tell me, | will 
also tell you by what authority | do these 
(things). 

*° The baptism of Juchanon, whence is it, from 
heaven or from men? But they thought within 
themselves, saying, If we shall say, From 
heaven, he saith to us, Why did ye not believe 
him? 
°° And if we shall say, From men, we fear from 
the crowd; for all have regarded Juchanon as a 
prophet. 

*7 And they answered, saying to him, We know 
not: Jeshu saith to them, Also I tell not you by 
what authority | do these (things). 

?8 But how doth [it] appear to you? a certain 
man had two sons; and he came to the elder, 
and said to him, My son, go to-day work in the 
vinery. 

*° But he answered and said, | am not willing: 
yet afterwards he relented, and went. 

He came to the other, and said likewise. He 
answered and said, | (will), my lord; yet went 
not. 

31 Which of these two did the will of his father? 
They say to him, The elder. Jeshu saith to them, 
Amen | tell you, the tribute-takers and harlots go 
before you into the kingdom of Aloha. 


° Matthew 21:21 - Were not divided; that is, in mind 


32 For Juchanon came to you in the way of 
righteousness; and you believed him not. But 
the tribute-takers and harlots believed him: but 
you neither when you saw (him, nor) afterwards, 
repented, that you might believe him. 

33 Hear another comparison: A certain man was 
a house-lord; and he planted a vinery, and 
surrounded it with an hedge, and dug a wine- 
press in it, and built in it a tower, and had it 
taken by labourers, and journeyed. 

34 And when the time of fruits drew near, he 
sent his servants to the husbandmen, that they 
might send him of the fruits of his vinery. 

°° And the husbandmen took his servants, and 
beat some, and stoned some, and killed others. 
°° And again he sent other servants more than 
the first, and they acted towards them likewise: 
37 last, he sent to them his son, saying, Now will 
they be ashamed from my son. 

But the husbandmen, when they saw the son, 
said among themselves, This is the heir; come, 
let us kill him, and take the inheritance. 
°° And they seized and cast him without the 
vinery, and killed him. 

“° When the lord of the vinery, therefore, 
cometh, what will he do to these husbandmen? 
*# They say to him, Most miserably will he 
destroy them, and the vinery will he cause to be 
held by other labourers, (even) such as will give 
him the fruits in their seasons. 

42 Jeshu saith to them, Have you not read in the 
scripture, that the stone which the builders 
rejected, this is become the head of the corner? 
By the Lord was this done, and it is wondrous in 
our eyes. 

43 On this account | tell you, that the kingdom of 
Aloha is taken from you, and shall be given to a 
people who will yield fruits. 

And whosoever shall fall upon this stone shall 
be broken; but every one upon whom it shall fall, 
it will scatter (him). 

° And when the chief priests and Pharishee 
heard his comparisons, they knew that 
concerning themselves he had spoken. 

“6 And they sought to apprehend him, but 
feared the people, because as a prophet they 
regarded him. 


22:1 And Jeshu answered again by 
comparisons, and said, 

? The kingdom of heaven resembles a royal 
person who made a feast to his son; 

? and he sent his servants to call the invited 
ones to the feast, but they were not willing to 
come. 


* And again he sent other servants, and said, 
Tell the invited ones, Behold, my dinner is 
prepared, my oxen and my fatlings are killed, 
and all things are ready; come to the feast. 

° But they despised (it), and went, one to his 
domain, and another to his business. 

ê But the rest took his servants and shamefully 
treated and killed (them). 

’ But when the king heard, he was wroth; and 
sent his forces and destroyed those murderers, 
and burned their city. 

è Then said he to his servants, The feast is 
prepared, and those who were invited were not 
worthy. 

? Go therefore into the outlets of the highways, 
and every one whom you find call to the feast. 

And those servants went forth into the 
highways, and assembled all whom they found, 
the bad and the good; and the place of feasting 
was filled with guests. 

" And the king entered to see the guests, and 
he saw there a man who was not dressed in the 
garments of a festival. 

? And he said to him, My friend, how didst thou 
enter here, when thou hast not the vestments of 
the feast? But he was silent. 

? Then said the king unto the servitors, Bind his 
hands and his feet, and cast him forth into the 
darknesses without: there shall be weeping and 
gnashing of teeth. 

For many are the called, but few the chosen. 

15 Then went the Pharishee and took counsel 
how they might ensnare him in discourse. 

16 And they sent to him their disciples with 
(certain) of the household of Herodes, saying to 
him, Doctor, we know that thou art resolutely 
true, and (that) the way of Aloha in truth thou 
teachest; neither carriest thou fear for man, for 
thou acceptest not the person of men.” 

7 Tell us then, how doth it appear to thee? is it 
lawful to give head-money”’ unto Cesar or not? 

But Jeshu knew their malice, and said, Why 
do you tempt me, you hypocrites? 

Show me the denarius of the head-silver. And 
they presented to him a denarius. 

And Jeshu said to them, Whose are this 
image and inscription? 

?1 They say, Cesar’s. He saith to them, Give 
then (the things) of Cesar unto Cesar, and (the 
things) of Aloha unto Aloha. 

22 And when they heard, they wondered, and 
left him, and went. 


° Matthew 22:10 — Recliners 
54 Matthew 22:16 — Faces of men 
°° Matthew 22:17 — Head-silver 


?3 In that (same) day came the Zadukoyee, 
affirming to him, (that) there is no life for the 
dead. And they questioned him, 

saying to him, Doctor, Musha has said to us 
that if a man die having no children, his brother 
shall take his wife and raise up seed unto his 
brother. 

?5 But there were with us seven brethren: the 
eldest (of whom) took a wife, and died. And 
because he had no children, he left his wife unto 
his brother. 

?® So also did he who was second, and he who 
was the third, and unto the seventh of them. 

*’ But the last of all the woman also is dead. 

?8 In the resurrection, therefore, of whom from 
these seven shall she be the wife? for all had 
taken her. 

°° Jeshu answered and said to them, You do 
err, because you understand not the scriptures 
nor the power of Aloha. 

°° For in the resurrection of the dead, they take 
not wives, neither are wives [united] to 
husbands; but as the angels of Aloha in heaven 
are they. 

31 But concerning the resurrection of the dead, 
have you not read that which has been spoken 
to you by Aloha, who said, 

32 Í am the God of Abraham, the God of Is’hok, 
the God of Jakub? But Aloha is not of those who 
are dead, but of those who are alive. 

33 And when the multitudes heard, they were 
wonder-struck at his doctrine. 

34 But when the Pharishee heard that he had 
silenced the Zadukoyee, they gathered together. 
3 And one from them, who was skilful in the 
law, questioned him, tempting him, 

°° Doctor, which commandment is greatest in 
the law? 

37 Jeshu said to him, Thou shalt love the Lorp 
thy Aloha with®® all thy heart, and with all thy 
soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy 
mind. 

38 This is the commandment, the great and the 
first. 

°° And the second is like unto it, That thou shalt 
love thy neighbour as thyself. 

“° On these two commandments hang the law 
and the prophets. 

41 While the Pharishee were gathered together, 
Jeshu questioned them, 

“2 and said, What say you concerning the 
Meshicha,---whose son [is he]? They say to him, 
Son of David. 


°° Matthew 22:37 - Or, from all, &c. 


43 Saith he to them, And how doth David in spirit 
call him The Lorp? For he said, 

“* that the Lorp said unto my Lord, Sit thou at 
my right hand until | put thine adversaries 
beneath thy feet. 

1 If, then, David calleth him the Lorp, how is he 
his son? 

“6 And no man could give to him the answer; 
nor did any man dare again from that day to 
question him. 


23:1 Then Jeshu discoursed with the multitudes 
and with his disciples, 

? and said to them, Upon the chair of Musha sit 
the scribes and the Pharishee. 

° Every thing, therefore, which they tell you to 
observe, observe and do; but after their 
practices do not act; for they say, and do not. 

And they bind heavy burdens, and lay them on 
the shoulders of men, but they [themselves] with 
their fingers are not willing to touch them. 

° And all their works they do that they may be 
seen of men; for they widen their tephillin,’” and 
lengthen the fringes of their waving vestments, ® 
ê and love the chief reclining-places at evening 
feasts, and the highest seats in synagogues, 

7 and the shaloma in public places, and to be 
called of men Rabi.”° 

è But be you not called Rabi: for One is your 
Master; but all ye are brethren. 

? And call no man Aba® to you upon earth: for 
One is your Father, who is in heaven. 

10 Neither be ye called Medabronee:°' for One 
is your Guide,---the Meshicha. 

1! But he who is great among you, let him be 
your servitor. 

12 Eor whosoever will exalt himself shall be 
humbled; and whosoever will abase himself 
shall be exalted. 

3 Woe to you, scribes and Pharishee, 
hypocrites! because you devour the houses of 
widows, with the pretext of prolonging your 
prayers; on account of which you shall receive 
the greater judgment. 

Woe to you, scribes and Pharishee, 
hypocrites! because you hold the kingdom of 
heaven closed before the children of men; for 


5% Matthew 23:5a - Phylakteries; called as above, 
from the Chaldee tephilla, "prayer" 

58 Matthew 23:5b - Martuto; vestis tremula: from 
the Chaldee rethath, tremuit. 

5? Matthew 23:7 — My Master 

© Matthew 23:9 - Father 

ĉ1 Matthew 23:10 — Guides 


you will not enter in yourselves, and them who 
are entering you will not permit to enter. 

15 Woe to you, scribes and Pharishee, 
hypocrites! because you go over sea and dry 
(land) to make one proselyte; and when you 
have done it, you make him doubly more a son 
of gihana than yourselves. 

1€ Woe to you, ye blind guides, who say, That 
[to him] who sweareth by the temple, it is 
nothing; but if he swear by the gold which is in 
the temple, he is liable! 

17 You senseless and blind! for which is greater, 
the gold, or the temple that sanctifieth the gold? 

18 And (that) whoever sweareth by the altar, it is 
nothing; but [if] he swear by the oblation which is 
upon it, he is liable. 

1 You foolish and sightless! for which is 
greater, the oblation, or the altar that sanctifieth 
the oblation? 

He therefore who sweareth by the altar, 
sweareth by it, and by all things that are upon it. 

And he who sweareth by the temple, 
sweareth by it, and by whatever abideth in it. 

And whosoever sweareth by heaven, 
sweareth by the throne of Aloha, and by Him 
who sitteth thereon. 

Woe to you, scribes, Pharishee, hypocrites! 
Because you tithe mint, dill, and cummin, and 
omit the more grave [requirements] of the law, --- 
justice, benignity, and faithfulness. For these 
you should have done, and those not omitted. 

4 You blind guides, who strain out gnats and 
swallow camels. 

?5 Woe to you, scribes and Pharishee, 
hypocrites! who cleanse the outside of the cup 
and dish (which) within are full of rapine and 
injustice. 

*° Sightless Pharishee! cleanse first the inside 
of the cup and the dish, that their outside also 
may be clean. 

? Woe to you, scribes and Pharishee, 
hypocrites! for you are like whited sepulchres, 
which without appear beautiful, but within are full 
of the bones of the dead and all impurity. 

So you also from without appear to the sons 
of men as righteous, but within you are full of 
unrighteousness and hypocrisy. 

Woe to you, scribes and Pharishee, 
hypocrites! because you rebuild the tombs of the 
prophets and beautify the sepulchres of the just; 
°° and say, If we had been in the days of our 
fathers, we would not have been with them 
partakers in the blood of the prophets: 

31 thus bearing witness against yourselves, that 
you are the sons of them who killed the 
prophets. 


32 And you also,---complete the measure of your 
fathers. 
33 Serpents, birth of vipers! how will you escape 
from the judgment of gihana? 
34 On this account, behold, | send to you 
prophets, and wise men, and scribes; (some) of 
these you shall kill and crucify; and (some) of 
these you shall scourge in your synagogues, 
and persecute them from city to city. 
°° So that there shall come upon you all the 
blood of the just which hath been shed upon the 
earth; from the blood of Habil the righteous, unto 
the blood of Zakaria-bar-Barakia, whom you 
slew between the temple and the altar. 
°° Amen | say unto you, that all these shall 
come upon this generation. 
37 Urishlem, Urishlem! who killest the prophets, 
and stonest them who are sent unto her, what 
times would | have gathered thy children, as 
gathereth the hen her young ones beneath her 
wings, and you would not! 

Lo, your house is left unto you desolate. 

For | say unto you, That you shall not see me 
from henceforth, until you shall say, Blessed is 
he who cometh in the name of the Lorb. 


24:1 And Jeshu went forth from the temple to 
depart: and his disciples approached him, 
showing him the building of the temple. 

* But he said to them, See you not all these? 
Amen I say to you, There shall not be left here a 
stone upon a stone which shall not be 
destroyed. 

3 And while Jeshu sat upon the mount of Olives, 
his disciples drew near and said between 
themselves and him, Tell us when these things 
shall be; and what is the sign of thy coming and 
of the consummation of the world. 

Jeshu answered and said to them, Beware 
that no man cause you to err; 

5 for many will come in my name and will say, | 
am the Meshicha; and many will be deceived. 

ê But it will be for you to hear [of] wars and the 
noise of battles; (yet) see that you be not 
perturbed; for all these will take place, but not 
yet is the end. 

For people will rise against people, and 
kingdom against kingdom; and there shall be 
famines, and plagues, and earthquakes in 
various places. 

ê But these are all the beginning of sorrows. 

? Then shall they deliver you to affliction, and 
shall kill you; and you shall be hated of all 
peoples on account of my name. 

' Then shall many be offended, and shall hate 
one another, and betray one another. 


11 And many lying prophets shall stand up, and 
shall delude the multitudes. 

12 And because of the abounding of iniquity, the 
love of many will languish. 

13 But he who shall persevere unto the end,---he 
shall live. 

14 And this annunciation of the kingdom shall be 
proclaimed in the whole world as a testimony for 
all nations; and then will come the end. 

15 But when you see the unclean sign of 
desolation which was spoken of by Daniel the 
prophet, that it standeth in the holy place;---he 
who readeth let him understand!--- 

1 then let those who are in Jehud escape to the 
mountain. 

And let not him who is on the roof descend to 
take what [is in] his house; 

18 nor he who is in the field turn back to take his 
vestment. 

19 But woe to those who are with child, and to 
those who give suck in those days! 

*° But pray that your flight may not be in the 
winter, nor on the shabath. 

?1 For then shall be the great affliction, such as 
hath not been from the beginning of the world 
until now, neither shall be (again). 

?? And unless those days be cut short, none 
could live of all flesh: but on account of the 
chosen those days shall be cut short. 

?3 Then if any one shall say to you, Lo, here is 
the Meshicha, or there; believe them not. 

*4 For there shall arise false Meshichas and 
prophets of untruth; and they shall give forth 
magnificent signs, so as to seduce, if possible, 
the chosen also. 

?5 If therefore they shall say to you, (observe! | 
have told you before,) 

? Behold, he is in the desert; go not forth: or, 
Behold, he is in the inner chamber; believe not. 
77 As the lightning cometh forth from the east, 
and is seen unto the west, so shall be the 
advent of the Son of man. 

?8 But where the body shall be, there will be 
assembled the eagles. 

But immediately after the affliction of those 
days, the sun will become dark, and the moon 
show not her light, and the stars shall fall from 
heaven, and the powers of heaven be 
commoved. 
°° And then shall be seen the standard of the 
Son of man in heaven, and then all the 
generations of the earth shall wail, and they 
shall see the Son of man coming upon the 
clouds of heaven, with great power and glory. 

31 And he shall send his angels with the great 
trumpet, and they shall gather the chosen who 


are his from the four winds and from the ends of 
heaven.” 
32 But from the fig-tree learn a parable: As soon 
as her branches are soft, and they put forth her 
leaves, you know that summer draweth nigh. 
33 So also, when all these are seen, you know 
that it cometh to the door. 
34 amen | say to you, that this race® shall not 
have passed away until all these shall take 
place. 

°° Heaven and earth shall pass away; but my 
words shall not pass away. 

°° But concerning that day and concerning that 
hour, no man knoweth; neither the angels of 
heaven, but the Father only. 

%7 But as the days of Nich, so shall be the 
coming of the Son of man. 

38 For as before the deluge they were eating 
and drinking, taking wives and giving to 
husbands, until the day that Nûch went into the 
ark; 

39 and knew not till the deluge came, and 
carried them all away; so shalt be the advent of 
the Son of man. 

“° Then two shall be in the field; one shall be 
taken, and one be left. 

# Two shall be grinding in the mill; one is taken, 
and one is left. 

* Be wakeful therefore, because ye know not in 
what hour cometh your Lord. 

43 But this know; that if the master of the house 
knew in what watch the thief would come, he 
would have been watching, and not have 
suffered his house to be broken through. 

4 Wherefore be ye also prepared, because in 
the hour that ye expect not shall come the Son 
of man. 

4 Who is the servant faithful and wise whom his 
lord shall appoint over the children of his house, 
to give every one his meat in his time? 

ê Blessed is that servant, who, when cometh 
his lord, shall be found doing so. 

7 Amen | say to you, that he will establish him 
over all that he hath. 

“8 But if that evil servant shall say in his heart, 
My lord withholdeth to come; 

4% and shall begin to beat his fellow-servants, 
and shall be eating and drinking with drunkards; 
50 the lord of that servant shall come in a day 
that he computeth not, and in an hour which he 
doth not know, 


* Matthew 24:31 - From the extremity of the 
heavens to their extremity 
°° Matthew 24:34 - Sharebtha, "tribe, people, nation" 


51 and shall sunder him, and set his lot with the 
hypocrites. There shall be weeping and 
gnashing of teeth. 


25:1 Then shall be likened the kingdom of 
heaven unto ten virgins, who took their lamps, 
and went forth to meet the bridegroom and the 
bride. 

? But five of them were wise, and five foolish. 

3 And those foolish (ones) took their lamps, but 
did not take with them the oil: 

4 but those were wise who took oil in vessels 
with their lamps. 

° But while the bridegroom withheld, they all 
dozed and slept. 

ê And in the dividing of the night there was the 
cry, Behold, the bridegroom cometh; go forth to 
his meeting. 

7 Then all the virgins arose, and prepared their 
lamps. 

ê But those foolish ones said to the wise, Give 
to us from your oil; for, behold, our lamps are 
gone out. 

But the wise ones answered them, saying, 
Lest it should not suffice for us and for you; but 
go to those who sell, and buy for you. 

10 And while they were gone to buy, the 
bridegroom came, and those who were prepared 
entered with him into the house of festivity,” and 
the gate was shut. 
11 At last came also those other virgins, saying, 
Our Lord, our Lord, open to us! 
12 But he answered and said to them, Assuredly 
| tell you, | Know you not. 
13 Be wakeful therefore, for you know not that 
day nor the hour. 
14 For as aman who journeyed called his 
servants, and delivered to them his property: 
15 To one he gave five talents, and to another 
two, and to another one, each man according to 
his faculty; and forthwith went away. 
16 But he who had received five talents went 
and traded with them, and gained five others. 

Likewise he who (had received) two by 
trading gained two others. 

But he who had received one went, dug in the 
earth, and hid the money of his lord. 

After a long time the lord of those servants 
came, and received from them the account. 
2 Then he drew near who had received the five 
talents, and brought five others, and said, My 
lord, five talents thou gavest me: behold, five 
others | have gained by them. 


64 Matthew 25:10 - Beth-chelulo 


*" His lord said to him, It is well, good and 
faithful servant; over a little thou hast been 
faithful, over much | will establish thee: enter into 
the joy of thy lord. 

22 And he of the two talents approached, and 
said, My lord, two talents thou gavest me: 
behold, two others | have gained by them. 

?3 His lord saith to him, It is well, servant good 
and faithful; over a little thou hast been faithful, 
over much will | establish thee: enter into the joy 
of thy lord. 

*4 But he also drew near who had received the 
one talent, and said, My lord, | knew thee, that 
thou wast a hard man, reaping where thou hadst 
not sowed, and gathering together from whence 
thou hadst not dispersed. 

*° And | feared, and went and hid thy talent in 
the earth: behold, thou hast thine own. 

6 His lord answered, Thou evil and slothful 
servant, thou didst know me that I reap where | 
have not sowed, and collect from whence | have 
not dispersed. 

’ Did it not behove thee to cast my money 
upon the table, that when | came | might require 
mine own with its increase? 

?8 Take therefore from him the talent, and give it 
unto him who hath ten talents. 

*° For unto him who hath shall be given, and it 
shall be added to him; but he who hath not, that 
also which he hath shall be taken from him. 

3 And the indolent servant cast forth into the 
darknesses without; there shall be weeping and 
gnashing of teeth. 

When the Son of man cometh in his glory, 
and all his holy angels with him, then shall he sit 
upon the throne of his glory. 

32 And before him shall be gathered all nations: 

and he shall separate them one from another, as 

the shepherd separateth the sheep from the 
oats. 

$ And he shall cause the sheep to stand upon 

his right hand, and the goats on his left. 

34 Then shall the King say to them on his right 

hand, Come, blessed of my Father, inherit the 

kingdom which was to be for you from the 

foundation of the world. 

For | was hungry, and you gave me to eat; | 
thirsted, and you made me to drink; | was a 
stranger, and you received me; 

| was naked, and you covered me; | was sick, 
and you cared for me; and | was in prison, and 
you came to me. 

37 Then shall say unto him those righteous, Our 
Lord! when did we see that thou wast hungry, 
and fed thee, or that thou didst thirst, and we 
gave thee drink? 


38 and when did we see thee a stranger, and 
received thee, or naked, and covered thee? 

°° and when did we see thee sick, or in prison, 
and came to thee? 

“° And the King shall answer and say to them, 
Amen | say to you, Inasmuch as you did it unto 
one of these my least brethren, unto me you did 
it. 

“' Then shall he say also unto them on his left 
hand, Go from me, accursed, into the fire of 
eternity, which was prepared for the accuser and 
for his angels. 

? For | was hungry and you gave me not to eat; 
and | thirsted, but you made me not to drink; 

? and I was a stranger, and you received me 
not; and naked, and you clothed me not; and | 
was sick, and in prison, and you visited me not. 

4 Then shall they also answer and say, Our 
Lord! when saw we thee hungry, or thirsty, or a 
stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did 
not minister unto thee? 

45 Then shall he answer and say to them, Amen 
| say unto you, that inasmuch as you did it not 
unto one of these little ones, you did it not to me. 
48 And these shall go away into the torment 
which is eternal, and the just into the life which is 
eternal. 


26:1 And when Jeshu had finished all these 
discourses, he said to his disciples, 
? You know not that after two days is the 
Petzcha,® and the Son of man is delivered up to 
be crucified. 
3 Then assembled the chief priests, and the 
scribes, and the elders of the people, in the hall 
of the chief of the priests, who was called 
Kaiapha. 
4 And they held counsel concerning Jeshu, how 
that by artifice they might apprehend and kill 
him. 
° And they said, Let it not be on the festival, lest 
there be a tumult among the people. 
ê And when Jeshu was at Bethania, in the 
house of Shemun the leper, 
there drew near to him a woman who carried a 
vase of aromatic balsam, great of price, and she 
poured it upon the head of Jeshu as he reclined. 
But his disciples saw and were displeased, 
and said, For what is this destruction? 
* For this could have been sold for much, and 
given to the poor. 
'° But Jeshu knew, and said to them, Why 
grieve you the woman? a good work hath she 
wrought upon me. 


°° Matthew 26:2 — Passover 


"For in all time the poor you have with you, but 
me you have not in all time with you. 

12 Eor this (woman) who hath poured this 
balsam upon my body, as unto my funeral hath 
done [it]. 

13 And Amen I say unto you, Wheresoever this 
my Gospel shall be proclaimed, in all the world, 
this also which she hath done shall be told for 
her memorial. 

14 Then went one from the twelve, named 
Jihuda S’carjuta, unto the chief priests, 

15 and said to them, What are you willing to give 
me, and | will deliver him to you? But they 
settled to him thirty of silver. 

ê And from that time®® he sought to him 
opportunity to betray him. 

17 But in the first day of the (Phatiree) 
unleavened-bread days, the disciples came to 
Jeshu, and said to him, Where wilt thou that we 
prepare for thee to eat the passover? 

But he said to them, Go into the city to a 
certain man, and say to him, Our master saith, 
My time hath come! with thee will | perform the 
passover with my disciples. 

19 And the disciples did as Jeshu had 
commanded, and prepared the passover. 

20 And when it was evening, he reclined with his 
twelve disciples. 

?1 And while they were eating, he said, Amen | 
say unto you, that one from you betrayeth me. 
22 And they were very sad, and began to say to 
him, one by one of them, My Lord, is it 1? 

?3 But he answered and said, One who dippeth 
his hand with me in the dish, he shall betray me. 
24 And the Son of man goeth as it is written 
concerning him; but woe to him, to that man by 
whom” the Son of man is betrayed! Better had it 
been for that man if he had not been born. 

*° Then Jihuda the traitor answered and said, 
Am not I (he), Rabi? Jeshu replieth to him, Thou 
hast said! 

è But while they were eating, Jeshu took the 
bread, and blessed, and brake, and gave to his 
disciples, and said, Take, eat, this (is) my body. 
*7 And he took the cup, and offered thanks, and 
gave to them, and said, Take, drink of this all of 
you: 

?8 this (is) my blood of the new covenant, which 
for multitudes is shed for the remission of sins. 
*° But | say to you, that I will not drink from 
henceforth of this product of the vines, until the 
day in which | shall drink it with you new in the 
kingdom of Aloha. 


°° Matthew 26:16 — From them 
® Matthew 26:24 — By whose hand 


°° And they sang praises, and went forth unto 
the mount of Olives. 
31 Then said Jeshu unto them, You all shall be 
offended in me this night; for it is written, | will 
strike the shepherd, and scattered shall be the 
sheep of his flock. 
32 But after that | am risen | am before you in 
Galila. 
33 Kipha answered and said to him, Though 
every man should be offended in thee, | never 
will be offended in thee. 
34 Jeshu saith to him, Amen I say to thee, that in 
this night, before the cock shall crow, three 
times thou wilt deny me. 
°° Kipha saith to him, If I am to die with thee, | 
will not deny thee. The same also all the 
disciples said. 
°° Then cometh Jeshu with them unto the place 
which is called Gedsiman; and he said to his 
disciples, Sit here while | go and pray. 
37 And he took Kipha and the two sons of 
Zabdai; and he began to be sorrowful, and to be 
vehemently agonized. 

And he said to them, My soul is afflicted unto 
death; wait for me here, and watch with me. 
°° And he removed a little, and fell upon his 
face, praying, and saying, My Father, if it be 
possible, let this cup pass from me; yet not as | 
will, but as thou. 
“° Then he came to his disciples, and found 
them sleeping; and he said to Kipha, How, could 
you not for one hour watch with me? 
* Be watchful and pray, that you enter not into 
temptation. The spirit is ready, but the body is 
infirm. 
5 Again he went the second time, and prayed, 
and said, My Father, if it be not possible for this 
cup to pass, unless | drink it, be done thy will! 

? And he came again, and found them asleep; 
for their eyes had become heavy. 

And he left them, and went again, and prayed 
the third time, and said the same word. 

° Then he came to the disciples, and said to 
them, Sleep on now, and be at rest; lo, the hour 
cometh, and the Son of man is betrayed into the 
hands of sinners. 

“6 Arise, let us go: behold, he cometh who 
betrayeth me. 

47 And while he was speaking, behold, Jihuda 
the traitor, one from the twelve, came, anda 
great multitude with him, with swords and clubs, 
from the chief priests and elders of the people. 
“8 And Jihuda the traitor had given to them a 
sign, and said, Whomsoever | shall kiss, that is 
he: take him. 


“8 And immediately he approached Jeshu, and 
said, Peace, my master! and kissed him. 

50 But he, Jeshu, said to him, (Is it) for that thou 
hast come, my companion? Then they came on, 
and laid their hands upon Jeshu, and took him. 
51 And, behold, one from those who were with 
Jeshu stretched forth his hand, and unsheathed 
a sword, and struck a servant of the high priest, 
and took off his ear. 

5 Then said Jeshu to him, Return thy sword to 
his place; for every one of them who take 
swords, by swords shall die. 

53 Or thinkest thou that | cannot request from 
my Father, and he shall appoint to me now more 
than twelve legions of angels? 

54 (But) how, then, would the scripture be 
accomplished, that thus it ought to be? 

°° In that hour Jeshu said to the multitudes, As 
against a robber are you come out, with swords, 
and with clubs, to seize me? Every day with you 
in the temple | sat and taught, and you did not 
apprehend me. 

ê But this was done that what is written in the 
prophets might be fulfilled. Then the disciples all 
deserted him, and fled. 

57 And they who apprehended Jeshu led him 
unto Kaiapha, chief of the priests, where the 
jurists and elders were assembled. 

°° But Shemun Kipha went after him from afar 
unto the court of the chief of the priests, and 
entered and sat within with the attendants, that 
he might see the end. 

°° But the chief priests, and the elders, and the 
whole assembly, sought against Jeshu 
witnesses, that they might put him to death; 

°° but they found not (any). And many witnesses 
of falsehood came. But, last, two came near, 

e: declaring, This said, | can destroy the temple 
of Aloha, and in three days rebuild it. 

ê And the chief of the priests arose, and said to 
him, Dost thou return no word? What are these 
witnessing against thee? 

ê But Jeshu was silent. And the chief of the 
priests answered and said to him, | swear thee, 
by Aloha the Living, that thou declare to us 
whether thou be the Meshicha, the Son of 
Aloha? 

ê Jeshu saith to him, Thou hast said: but | say 
to you, That hereafter ye shall see him, the Son 
of man, sitting at the right hand of Power, and 
coming on the clouds of heaven. 

ê Then the chief of the priests tore his robes, 
and said, Behold, he hath blasphemed! what 
further need have we of witnesses? Behold, now 
we have heard his blasphemy. 


°° What will you? They answered saying, He 
deserves death. 

ê Then did they spit in his face, and smote him; 
and others struck him, 

ê saying, Prophesy to us, Meshicha! Who is he 
that smiteth thee? 

°° But Kipha was sitting without, in the hall, and 
a certain female domestic approached him, 
saying to him, Thou also wast with Jeshu 
Natsroia. 

70 But he denied before all, and said, | know not 
what thou sayest. 

71 And when he had gone out into the vestibule, 
another saw him, and said to them, This also 
was there with Jeshu Natsroia. 

” And again he denied with oaths, | know not 
the man. 

73 But, after a little while, they who were 
standing drew near, and said to Kipha, 
Assuredly thou art of them; for thy speech also 
makes thee known. 

Then began he to imprecate and to swear, | 
know not the man! And in that hour the cock 
crowed. 

75 And Kipha remembered the word of Jeshu, 
who had said to him, That before the cock shall 
crow, three times wilt thou have denied me. And 
he went without, and wept bitterly. 


27:1 But when it was morning, the chief priests 
and elders of the people took counsel against 
Jeshu, how they should put him to death. 
? And they bound him, and led him away, and 
delivered him to Pilatos the governor. 
? Then Jihuda the traitor, when he saw that 
Jeshu was condemned, repented him, and went 
hastily, and returned those thirty of silver unto 
the chief priests and elders, 
and said, | have sinned, for | have betrayed 
the innocent blood. But they said to him, To us? 
what to us? Thou knowest,---thou! 
° And he cast down the silver in the temple, and 
passed away, and went and strangled himself. 
But the chief priests took up the silver, and 
said, It is not lawful that we throw it into the 


place of offering, because it is the price of blood. 


7 And they took counsel, and bought with it the 
field of the potter, for the burial-place of 
strangers. 

ê Wherefore that field has been called, The field 
of blood, until this day. 

* Then was fulfilled what had been spoken by 
the prophet, who said, And | took the thirty 
(pieces) of silver, the price of him who was 
precious, whom the sons of Isroel bargained for; 


10 and gave them for the field of the potter, as 
the LoRD commanded me. 

" But Jeshu himself stood before the governor. 
And the governor questioned him, and said to 
him, Thou art the king of the Jihudoyee? Jeshu 
said to him, Thou hast said. 

12 And while the chief priests and elders were 
accusing him, he returned not a word. 

13 Then said Pilatos unto him, Hearest thou not 
what they witness against thee? 

14 But he gave him no answer, no, not in one 
word; and upon this (Pilate) marvelled greatly. 

5 Now at every festival the governor was 
accustomed to release one of the bound unto 
the people, whomsoever they would. 

ê But there was (then) bound a notorious 
prisoner who was called Bar-aba. 

7 And when they were assembled, Pilatos said 
to them, Whom will you that | release unto you, 
Bar-aba, or Jeshu who is called the Meshicha? 

18 Eor Pilatos knew that from malice they had 
delivered him. 

19 But while the governor sat upon his tribunal, 
his wife sent to him saying, Let there be nothing 
between thee and that Just One; for much have 
| suffered in a dream to-day on his account. 

20 But the chief priests and elders persuaded 
the multitude that he should release to them 
Bar-aba, that they might destroy Jeshu. 

?1 And the governor answered and said to them, 
Whom will you that | shall release to you of 
these two? Then they said, Bar-aba. 

?? Pilatos saith to them, And to Jeshu who is 
called the Meshicha, what shall | do with him? 
They all said, Let him be crucified. 

?3 Pilatos saith to them, Why, what evil hath he 
done? But they clamoured the more, and said, 
Let him be crucified! 

*4 Then Pilatos, when he saw that nothing 
availed, but that the tumult became greater, took 
waters (and) washed his hands before” the 
assembly, and said, | am expiated from the 
blood of this Just One. You shall know. 

5 And all the people answered and said, His 
blood upon us, and upon our children! 

2 Then he released to them Bar-aba; and 
scourged Jeshu with thongs, and delivered him 
to be crucified. 

7 Then the soldiers of the governor took Jeshu 
to the Praetorium, and the whole cohort 
gathered against him. 

è And they stripped him, and invested him with 
a cloak of crimson. 


°° Matthew 27:24 - In the eye of the assembly 


*° And they interwove a crown of thorns, and set 
it upon his head, and a cane in his right hand: 
and they kneeled upon their knees before him, 
and mocked him, saying, Hail, king of the 
Jihudoyee! 

°° And they did spit in his face, and took the 
cane, and struck him upon his head. 

31 And when they had derided him, they 
stripped him of the cloak, and clothed him with 
his own garments, and led him away to be 
crucified. 

32 And when they had gone forth, they found a 
Kurinean man whose name was Shemun: this 
(man) they compel to carry his cross. 

33 And they came to a place which is called 
Gogultho, which is expounded, The skull. 

34 And they gave him to drink vinegar mingled 
with gall: and he tasted, but was not willing to 
drink. 

°° And when they had crucified him, they 
divided his garments by lot: that what was 
spoken by the prophet might be fulfilled, They 
parted my garments among them, and upon my 
vesture did they cast lots. 

ê And they sat down and watched him there. 
37 And they placed over his head the occasion 
of his death, in the writing, This (is) Jeshu, the 
King of the Jihudoyee. 

38 And they crucified with him two thieves, one 
on his right hand, and one on his left. 

°° But they who passed by railed against him, 
moving their heads, 

“° and saying, Destroyer of the temple, and 
builder of it in three days! deliver thyself, if thou 
art the Son of Aloha, and come down from the 
cross. 

*# Likewise also the chief priests mocking him, 
with the scribes and elders and Pharishee, 
saying, 

“?'He saved others; himself he cannot save. If 
he be the King of Isroel, let him now descend 
from the cross, that we may see and believe in 
him. 

43 He trusted upon Aloha; let him liberate him 
now, if he delighteth in®? him; for he said, | am 
the Son of Aloha. 

“* Likewise also the robbers who were crucified 
with him reviled him. 

4 But from the sixth hour” there was darkness 
upon all the land until the ninth hour. 

“8 And about the ninth hour Jeshu cried with a 
high voice, Aloha! Aloha! why hast thou forsaken 
me?” 


® Matthew 27:43 — Willeth him 
7° Matthew 27:45 - Six hours, &c. 


4 But certain of them who stood there, when 
they heard, said, This hath cried unto llio. 
“8 And forthwith ran one from them, and took a 
sponge, and filled it with vinegar, and set it upon 
a cane, and gave him to drink. 
“° But the rest said, Let alone, we will see 
whether Ilio (will) come to deliver him. 
°° But he, Jeshu, again cried with a high voice, 
and dismissed his spirit. 
51 And at once the veil” of the temple was rent 
in twain from above to beneath; and the earth 
was shaken, and the rocks were riven. 
52 And the house of the buried was opened; and 
the bodies of many of the saints who had been 
asleep arose, 
53 and came forth, and after his resurrection 
went into the holy city, and were seen by many. 
54 But the centurion and those with him, who 
guarded Jeshu, when they saw the commotion 
and those (portents) which took place, feared 
greatly, and said, Assuredly this was the Son of 
Aloha. 
Re (And) many women were there, beholding 
from afar; those who had come after Jeshu from 
Galila, and had ministered unto him. 
°° One of them was Mariam Magdolitha, and 
Mariam the mother of Jakub and of Josi, and the 
mother of the sons of Zabdai. 
°” But when it was evening, there came a rich 
man from Rometha, whose name was Jauseph, 
who himself also was a disciple of Jeshu. 
°° This went unto Pilatos, and begged the body 
of Jeshu. And Pilatos commanded that the body 
should be given to him. 
°° And Jauseph took the body, and wound it 
round in a cloth of pure linen, 
8° and laid it in a new house of burial of his own, 
which was hewn out in the rock. And they rolled 
a great stone, and heaved it against the door of 
the sepulchre, and went. 
ê1 Now there were there Mariam Magdolitha and 
the other Mariam, who were sitting over against 
the sepulchre. 
ê But the day which was next after the 
preparation, the chief priests and Pharishee 
came together unto Pilatos, 

saying to him, Our lord, we remember that 
that impostor said while alive, That after three 
days | will arise. 
ê Command therefore that they watch the 
sepulchre till (after) the third of the days; lest his 
disciples come, and steal him away by night, 
and tell the people that from the house of the 


™ Matthew 27:46 - IL! IL! lamono shabakthéni! 
” Matthew 27:51 — The faces of the gate 


dead he has risen, and the last delusion be 
worse than the first. 

® Pilatos saith to them, Ye have guards; go, 
watch diligently, as ye know how. 

°° So they went, and set a watch (about) the 
sepulchre, and sealed the stone along with the 
guards. 


28:1 From the evening (end) of the sabbath, 
when the first (day) in the week was lightening, 
Mariam Magdolitha and the other Mariam came 
to see the sepulchre. 

? And, behold, there was a great earthquake; for 
the angel of the Lorp descended from heaven 
and drew near, rolled the stone from the door, 
and sat upon it. 

? His aspect was like lightning, and his raiment 
was white as the snow. 

And with fear of him they who were watching 
were shaken, and became as the dead. 

° But the angel answered and said to the 
women, Fear not ye; for | know that for Jeshu 
who was crucified you are seeking. 

ê He is not here: for he is risen, even as he said. 
Come, see the place in which our Lord was laid: 
and go with speed, and tell his disciples that 

he is risen from the house of the dead; and, 
behold, he goeth before you into Galila. There 
shall you see him. Lo, | have told you. 

è And they went quickly from the sepulchre, with 
fear and with great joy, and ran that they might 
tell his disciples. 

* And, behold, Jeshu met them, and said to 
them, Peace to you! And they approached [him], 
held him by the feet, and adored him. 

10 Then said Jeshu to them, Fear not; but go tell 
my brethren, that | will go into Galila, and there 
they shall see me. 

" But while they went, there came certain from 
those guards into the city, and told the chief 
priests every thing that had been done. 

12 And they assembled with the elders, and took 
counsel; and they gave money not a little to the 
guards, 

'S telling them, Say you that his disciples came 
(and) stole him away in the night, while we slept. 

14 And if this be heard before the governor, we 
will persuade him, and make you without care. 

But they, when they had received the money, 
did as they had instructed them; and that saying 
went forth among the Jihudoyee until to-day. 


16 But the eleven disciples went into Galila, unto 
the mountain where Jeshu had appointed them. 

17 And when they saw him, they worshipped 
him; but from them some had doubted. 

18 And Jeshu drew near, and discoursed with 
them, and said to them, There is given unto me 
all power in heaven and in earth. As the Father 
sent me, so also | send you. 

19 Go therefore, disciple all nations, and baptize 
them in the name (of) the Father, and (of) the 
Son, and (of) the Spirit of Holiness. 

20 And teach them to observe all things 
whatsoever | have commanded you. And, 
behold, | am with you all the days, until the 
consummation of the world. Amen. 


The Preaching of Markos The Evangelist 


1:1 The beginning of the Gospel of Jeshu 
Meshicha, the Son of Aloha. 

? As it is written in Eshaia the prophet:--Behold, 
| send my angel before thy face, Who shall 
make straight” thy way. 

The voice which crieth in the desert, Prepare 
the way of the Lorp, Make level his paths. 

Juchanon was in the desert, baptizing, and 
proclaiming the baptism of repentance for the 
remission of sins. 

5 And all the region of Jehud and all the sons of 
Urishlem went out to him; and he baptized them 
in Jurdan the river, while they were confessing 
their sins. 

ê But Juchanon himself was clothed with a 
garment of the hair of camels, and engirded with 
a belt of leather upon his loins; and his food was 
locusts and wilderness honey. 

7 And he proclaimed and said, Behold, (One) 
cometh after me, who is mightier than |; he, the 
latchet of whose shoes | am not worthy to bow 
myself to unloose. 

ê | have baptized you with waters; but he shall 
baptize you with the Spirit of Holiness. 

And it was in those days that Jeshu came from 
Natsrath of Galila, and was baptized in Jurdan 
by Juchanon. 

19 And as soon as he had ascended from the 
waters, he saw the heavens part asunder, and 
the Spirit, as a dove, descend upon him. 

And the voice was from the heavens, Thou 
art my Son, the Beloved: in thee | have 
delighted. 

12 And immediately the Spirit led him forth into 
the desert. 

13 And he was there in the desert forty days, 
being tempted by Satana: and he was with the 
wild beasts; and the angels ministered to him. 

14 But after Juchanon was delivered up,“ Jeshu 
came to Galila, and proclaimed the annunciation 
of the kingdom of Aloha. 

15 And he said, The time is complete; the 
kingdom of Aloha cometh: repent, and believe 
the gospel.” 

16 And while he walked about the sea of Galila, 
he saw Shemun and Andreas his brother, who 
were casting nets into the sea: for they were 
fishers. 


? Mark 1:2 - Or, prepare 
74 Mark 1:14 - Or, perfected 
Mark 1:15 - Or, the annunciation 


17 And Jeshu said to them, Come after me, and 
| will make you fishers of the sons of men. 

18 And at once they forsook their nets, and went 
after him. 

13 And when he had passed on a little, he saw 
Jakub bar Zabdai and Juchanon his brother; and 
they also were in a vessel, preparing their nets. 
20 And he called them; and forthwith they left 
Zabdai their father with the hirelings, and went 
after him. 
=" And when they were come to Kapher- 
nachum, he forthwith taught on the sabbaths in 
their assemblies. 

22 And they wondered at his doctrine; for he 
taught them as having power, and not as their 
Sophree. 

?3 And there was in their assembly a man who 
had an unclean spirit: and he cried 
*4 and said, What to us and to thee, Jeshu 
Natsroya? Art thou come to destroy us? | know 
thee who thou art, the Holy One of Aloha. 

? And Jeshu restrained him, and said, Close 
thy mouth, and come forth from him. 

*° And the impure spirit threw him down, and 
cried with a high voice, and went forth from him. 
“7 And all wondered, and questioned one with 
another, Who is this? and what is this new 
doctrine? because with authority he 
commandeth the impure spirits, and they obey 
him. 

*8 And his fame soon went out through all the 
region of Galila. 

*° And he proceeded from the assembly, and 
came to the house of Shemun and Andreas with 
Jacub and Juchanon. 

3 And the mother-in-law of Shemun was lying 
in a fever; and they told him concerning her. 

31 And he approached, took her by her hand; 
and she arose, and at once the fever left her, 
and she served them. 

32 Then in the evening at sun-setting they 
brought to him all those who were grievously 
affected and demoniacs. 

33 And the whole city was assembled at the 
gate: 

and he healed multitudes who were 
grievously affected with various diseases, and 
cast out many demons, and would not permit the 
demons to speak; for they knew him. 

3 And in the morning he arose long before 
(day), and went into a solitude, and there 
prayed. 


°° And Shemun and (they) who (were) with him 
sought for him; 

37 and when they had found him, they said to 
him, All men are seeking thee. 

38 He said to them, Proceed you to the 
neighbouring towns and cities; for there also | 
will preach, because for this am | come. 

°° And he preached in all their assemblies in all 
Galila, and cast out devils. 

“° And a leper came to him, and fell at his feet, 
and besought him, and said to him, If thou wilt, 
thou canst cleanse me. 

1 And Jeshu had compassion on him, and 
stretched forth his hand, touched him, and said, 
| will, be clean. 

? And in that very hour his leprosy went from 
him, and he was cleansed. 

° And he restrained him, and led him forth, 

“* and said to him, See lest thou tell any one; 
but go, show thyself to the priests, and offer the 
oblation for thy purification as Musha 
commanded for their testimony. 

“S But he, when he was gone forth, began to 
announce it much, and so divulged the matter as 
that Jeshu could not go openly in the city, but 
was without in a solitary part: and they came to 
him from every place. 


2:1 And Jeshu entered again into Kapher- 
nachum for some days. And when they had 
heard that he was in the house, 
? many were gathered together, so that it could 
not contain them, nor yet (the space) before the 
gate; and he spake with them the word. 

And they came to him, and brought him a 
paralytic borne between four. 
“ And when they could not approach him for the 
crowd, they ascended to the roof, and took the 
covering from the place where Jeshu was, and 
let down the couch on which the paralytic lay. 
° When Jeshu saw their faith, he said to the 
paralytic himself, My son, forgiven to thee are 
thy sins. 

But some of the Sophree and Pharishee were 
there, who sat and reasoned in their heart, 
7 Who is this uttering blasphemy? Who can 
forgive sins but One, Aloha? 
ê But Jeshu knew in his spirit that they so 
reasoned within themselves, and said to them, 
Why reason you these things in your heart? 
? Which is easier, to say to the paralytic, 
Forgiven are thy sins, or to say, Arise, lift up thy 
couch, and walk? 
10 But, that you may know that the Son of man 
hath power on earth to forgive sins, he said to 
the paralytic, 


" To thee | say, Arise, take up thy couch, and 
go to thy house. 

12 And he arose at once, and took up his couch, 
and went forth before them all; so that all 
wondered, and glorified Aloha, saying, Never 
saw we thus. 

13 And he went forth again to the sea; and the 
whole multitude came to him, and he taught 
them. 

14 And when he had passed, he saw Levi bar 
Chalphai sitting among the publicans: and he 
said to him, Come after me; and arising, he went 
after him. 

15 And while he reclined in the house, many 
publicans and sinners reclined with Jeshu and 
with his disciples; for they were many, and they 
followed him. 

ê And the Sophree and Pharishee, when they 
saw him eat with publicans and with sinners, 
said to his disciples, Why with publicans and 
with sinners doth he eat and drink? 

1” But when Jeshu heard, he said to them, The 
healthy have no need of the physician, but they 
who are sorely affected: | have not come to call 
the righteous but the sinners. 

Now the disciples of Juchanon and of the 
Pharishee fasted. And they came and said to 
him, (While) the disciples of Juchanon and of the 
Pharishee fast, why do not thy disciples fast? 

19 Jeshu said to them, Can the sons of the 
marriage-chamber fast, while the bridegroom is 
with them? No; 

*° but the days shall come when the bridegroom 
shall be taken up from them: then shall they fast 
in those days. 

21 No man inserteth a new piece, and seweth it 
upon an old vestment; lest that new should take 
away its fulness from the old, and make the rent 
the greater. 

?? And no man putteth new wine into old 
bottles;”° lest the wine rend the bottles, and the 
bottles perish, and the wine be spilled: but they 
put new wine into new bottles. 

And it was that, as Jeshu went among the 
grain, his disciples walked and plucked the ears. 
And the Pharishee said to him, See how on 

the shabath they do what is not lawful. 

Jeshu saith to them, Have you never read 
what David did, when he needed and was 
hungry, he, and they (who were) with him? 

2 how he entered the house of Aloha, when 
Abiathar was high priest, and did eat the bread 
of the table of the Lorp, that which it is not lawful 


76 Mark 2:22 — Or, Sacks, Skins 


except for the priests to eat, and gave also to 
those who were with him? 

27 And he said to them, that the shabath on 
account of the Son of man was made, and not 
the Son of man on account of the shabath. 

8 The Son of man, therefore, is the Lord also of 
the shabath. 


3:1 And Jeshu again entered the congregation: 
and a certain man was there whose hand was 
withered; 

? and they watched him whether he would cure 
him on the shabath, that they might accuse him. 
3 And he said to him, the man with the withered 
hand, Stand up in the midst. 

He said also to them, Is it lawful on the 
shabath to do good, or (that) which (is) evil? to 
save life, or to destroy it? But they were silent. 

° And he beheld them with indignation, while it 
grieved him on account of the hardness of their 
hearts. And he said to the man, Stretch out thy 
hand. And he stretched (it); and his hand 
straightened. 

ê And the Pharishee went out immediately, and 
took counsel against him, how they might 
destroy him. 

7 And Jeshu with his disciples went towards the 
sea: and many people joined him from Galila, 
and from Jehud, 

è and from Urishlem, and from Edum, and from 
beyond Jurdan, and from Tsur, and from 
Tsaidon; great multitudes, who, having heard all 
that he had done, came to him. 

* And he spoke to his disciples to bring a vessel 
for him, that the crowds might not oppress him; 
10 for he had healed multitudes, until they were 
falling” upon him to touch him. 

11 And they who were troubled with impure 
spirits, when they saw him, fell down, and cried, 
saying, Thou art the Son of Aloha. 

12 And he strongly prohibited them to make him 
known. 

13 And he ascended a mountain, and called 
those whom he willed; and they came to him. 

14 And he chose twelve to be with him, and to 
send them to preach, 

' and to have authority to heal diseases and to 
cast out devils. 

And he named to Shemun the name of Kipha; 
17 and upon Jacub bar Zabdai, and Juchanon 
the brother of Jacub, he set the name of B'nai- 
regesh, which is, (B’nai-ramo,) Sons of thunder. 


” Mark 3:10 — Or, rushing 


18 And Andreas, and Philipos, and Bar-Thulmai, 
and Mathai, and Thoma, and Jacub bar 
Chalphai, and Thadai, and Shemun the Zealous, 

19 and Jihuda S’carjuta,—he who betrayed him. 
20 And they came to the house: and the 
assemblies gathered again, so that they could 
not eat bread. 

71 And his relatives heard, and came forth to 
take him; for they said, He hath gone out of 
himself. 

2 And the Sophree, they who had come down 
from Urishlem, said, Belzebub is in him, and by 
the prince of devils he casteth out devils. 

?3 And Jeshu called them, and by similitudes 
said to them, How can Satan cast out Satan? 

*4 Eor if a kingdom against itself be divided, that 
kingdom cannot stand; 

*° and if a house against itself be divided, that 
house cannot stand; 

ê and if Satan rise against Satan, and be 
divided, he cannot stand, but his end is. 

No one can enter into the house of the 
strong, and spoil his goods, unless first the 
strong one he bind; and then his house he may 
destroy. 

?8 Amen | say to you, That all sin and 
blasphemy which the sons of men blaspheme 
may be remitted them; 

*° but whosoever shall blaspheme against the 
Spirit of Holiness hath no remission for ever, but 
is condemned to the judgment that is eternal. 

3 Because they had said that an unclean spirit 
was in him. 

31 And there came his mother and his brethren, 
standing without; and they sent to call him to 
them. 

32 But the congregation sat about him. And they 
say to him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren 
without inquire for thee. 

33 And he answered, and said to them, Who is 
my mother, and who are my brethren? 

* And looking upon those who sat with him, he 
said, Behold my mother, and behold my 
brethren: 
°° for whosoever shall do the will of Aloha, he is 
my brother, and my sister, and my mother. 


4:1 And he began again to teach by the sea- 
side: and great assemblies were gathered to 
him; so that, ascending, he sat in a bark on the 
sea, and the whole multitude stood on the land, 
by the edge of the water. 

? And he instructed them by many parables, and 
said in his teaching, 


78 Mark 4:1 - Hand of the sea 


? Listen: Behold, a sower went forth to sow; 

“ and as he sowed, some fell by the way-side, ” 
and the fowl came and devoured it. 

° And other fell upon the rock, so that it had not 
much earth; and it soon came up, because it 
had not depth of earth: 

ê but when the sun arose, it became hot; and 
inasmuch as it had no root, it dried up. 

7 And other fell in a place of thorns; and the 
thorns sprang up, and choked it, and it gave no 
fruits. 

8 But other fell upon good ground; and it came 
up, and grew, and gave fruits, some thirty, some 
sixty, and some a hundred. 

* And he said, Whoever hath ears to hear, let 
him hear. 

'° And when he was alone, they who were with 
him along with his twelve inquired of him 
[concerning] that parable. 

And Jeshu said to them, To you it is given to 
know the mystery of the kingdom of Aloha; but 
to those without every thing is in parables: 

that while seeing they may see, and not see; 
and while hearing they may hear, and not 
understand; lest they should be converted, and 
their sins be forgiven them. 

13 And he said to them, Do you not know this 
parable? how will you know all parables? 

14 The sower who sowed, the word sowed. 

15 These which were by the way-side, these are 
they in whom the word is sown; and when they 
have heard, immediately cometh Satana, and 
taketh up the word which was sowed in their 
heart. 

1€ And these who upon the rock are sowed, 
these are they who, when they have heard the 
word, at once with joy receive it: 

7 but they have no root in themselves, but are 
(only) for a time; and when there is affliction or 
persecution on account of the word, they are 
soon offended. 

18 And these who in the place of thorns are 
sown, these are they who hear the word; 

and the care of this world, and the 
deceptiveness of wealth, and the remainder of 
other lusts, entering, choke the word, and it is 
without fruits. 

And these who in good ground are sowed, 
these are they who hear the word, and receive, 
and give fruits, thirty, and sixty, and a hundred. 

?1 And he said to them, A lamp never cometh to 
be put under a measure, or under a bed: is it not 
set upon a candlestick? 


7 Mark 4:4 - Upon the hand of the way 


22? Eor nothing is hid which shall not be revealed: 
nor is there any thing in secret which is not to be 
manifested. 

if any man hath ears to hear, let him hear. 

24 And he said to them, Consider what you hear. 
With that measure which you mete, you shall 
have measured to you; and there shall be, 
added to you those which you hear. 

*° For whosoever hath, unto him shall be given; 
and whosoever hath not, that also which he hath 
shall be taken from him. 

26 And he said, So is the kingdom of God, as a 
man who shall cast seed into the earth; 

77 and shall sleep, and rise up by night and day, 
and the seed shall increase, and become long, 
while he knoweth not, 

?8 For the earth yieldeth him fruit; and first is 
there the plant, and after it the ear, but lastly the 
completed corn in the ear. 

But when the fruit is mature, immediately 
cometh the sickle, because the harvest is come. 
3° And he said, To what may we compare the 
kingdom of Aloha? and with what comparison 
shall we compare it? 

31 Itis like a grain of mustard, which, when 
sown in the earth, is smaller than all seeds 
which are in the earth: 

32 and when it is sown, it springeth up, and 
becometh greater than all herbs, and maketh 
great branches; so that in its shadow the fowl 
can dwell. 

33 In parables such as these spake Jeshu with 
them, in parables such as they could hear. 

34 And without parable did he not speak with 
them: but to his disciples, between him and 
them, he explained all. 

3 And he said to them that day, in the evening, 
Let us pass to the opposite shore. 

°° And they sent away the assemblies, and took 
him into the vessel; and other vessels were with 
him. 

37 And there was a great commotion and wind, 
and the waves fell upon the vessel, which was 
nigh being filled. 

°° But Jeshu upon a pillow slept in the after-part 
of the vessel, and they came and raised him, 
saying to him, Raban,® hast thou no care that 
we are perishing? 

°° And he arose, and restrained the wind, and 
said to the sea, Peace, be silent. And the wind 
ceased, and there was a great stillness. 

“° And he said to them, Why feared ye? how is 
it ye have no faith? 


8° Mark 4:38 — Our Master 


“' And they feared with great fear, and said 
among themselves,”' Who is this, to whom the 
winds and the sea are obedient? 


5:1 And they came to the other side of the sea, 
to the region of the Gadroyee. 

? And when he had come from the vessel, there 
met him from the place of tombs a man who had 
an unclean spirit, 

3 and he dwelt in the place of tombs; and with 
chains no man could bind him: 

“ for, so often as with shackles and chains he 
had been bound, the chains he had broken, and 
the shackles he had burst asunder; and no man 
could subdue him. 

° And at all time, by night and by day, he was in 
the place of tombs, and in the mountains, crying 
out, and bruising himself with stones. 

ê But when he saw Jeshu from afar, he ran, 
worshipped him, 

and cried with a high voice, and said, What to 
me and to thee, Jeshu, Son of Aloha the Most 

High? | adjure thee by Aloha, that thou torment 
me not!— 
® For he had said to him, Come forth from the 
man, unclean spirit!— 

* And he questioned him, How is thy name? 
And he said to him, Legion is our name, 
because we are many. 

10 And he besought him much that he would not 
send him out of the region. 

11 Now at the mountain there was a great herd 
of swine feeding. 

12 And the devils besought him, saying, Send us 
into those swine, that into them we may enter. 

13 And he suffered them. And those unclean 
spirits went forth and entered into the swine; and 
that herd ran to the rock, and plunged into the 
sea, as two thousand, and were drowned in the 
waters. 

14 And they who kept them fled, and told in the 
city, and also in the hamlets; and they came 
forth to see what was done. 

And they came to Jeshu, and saw him who 
(had had) the devils, sitting, clothed, and sane; 
him, who had had in him the legion and they 
were afraid. 

16 And they who had seen, related to them what 
had been done to him who had had the devils, 
and also concerning those swine. 

And they began to beg of him to go from their 
coast. 


81 Mark 4:41 — One to one 


18 And when he had ascended the vessel, he in 
whom had been the devils besought him that he 
might be with him. 

19 But he permitted him not; but said to him, Go 
to thy house, to thy men, and show them what 
the Lorp hath done for thee, and (how he) hath 
had mercy on thee. 

20 And he went, and began to preach in the ten 
cities what Jeshu had done for him: and all 
marvelled. 

21 And when Jeshu had passed in the vessel to 
the opposite side, there were again congregated 
unto him great gatherings, while he was upon 
the shore of the sea. 

?2 And there came one whose name was 
Jorosh, one of the masters of the synagogue; 
and when he saw him, he fell at his feet, 

?3 and besought him much, saying to him, My 
daughter is greatly afflicted; come, lay thy hand 
upon her, and she will be healed, and live. 

% And Jeshu went with him; and a great 
multitude adhered to him, and oppressed him. 

But a certain woman, who had a defluxion of 
blood twelve years, 

who much had suffered from many 
physicians, and had expended all whatever she 
had, and was nothing helped, but also the more 
afflicted, 

*7 having heard of Jeshu, came in the press of 
the crowd behind him, and touched his 
vestment. 

?8 For she said, If | but touch his vestment, | 
shall live. 

*° And immediately the fountain of her blood 
was dried; and she felt in her body that she had 
been healed from her plague. 

30 But Jeshu at once knew within himself that 
power had gone forth from him, and he turned to 
the crowd, and said, Who touched my 
garments? 

His disciples say to him, Thou seest the 
crowds that oppress thee, and sayest thou, Who 
touched me? 

And he looked round to see who this had 
done. 

33 But the woman herself, fearing and trembling, 
because she knew what had been done for her, 
came, fell before him, and told him all the truth. 
3% But he said to her, My daughter, thy faith hath 
saved thee; go in peace, and be healed from thy 
plague. 

3 And while he was speaking, there came 
some of the house of the master of the 


synagogue, saying, Thy daughter is dead: for 
what then art thou wearying the Teacher??? 

°° But Jeshu heard the word which they spake, 
and said to the master of the synagogue, Fear 
not, only believe. 

37 And he did not permit any one to go with him, 
except Shemun Kipha, and Jacub, and 
Juchanon, brother of Jacub. 

38 And they came to the house of that master of 
the synagogue, and he saw how they made a 
tumult, and wept and bewailed. 

3° And he entered, and said to them, Why make 
you a tumult, and weep? the damsel is not dead, 
but asleep. 
“° And they derided him. But Jeshu put them all 
forth, and took the father of the damsel, and her 
mother, and those who were with her, and went 
in where the damsel was lying. 

1 And he took the hand of the damsel, and said 
to her, Damsel, arise. 
42 And forthwith the damsel arose, and walked; 
for she was a daughter of twelve years. And 
they wondered with great admiration. 

And he charged them greatly that no one 

should know this, and spake that they should 
give her (somewhat) to eat. 


6:1 And Jeshu went forth from thence, and 
came to his city; and his disciples adhered to 
him. 

? And when it was shabath, he began to teach 
in the house of the congregation: and many who 
heard wondered, and said, Whence to him are 
these? and what is this wisdom which hath been 
given him, that miracles such as these by his 
hands should be done? 

3 Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mariam, 
and the brother of Jacub, and of Josi, and of 
Jehuda, and of Shemun? and are not his sisters 
here with us? And they were offended with him. 
“ And Jeshu said to them, No prophet is 
despised, unless in his own city, and among his 
kinsfolk, and in his own house. 

° And he could not do there any miracle, except 
that upon a few sick he laid his hands, and 
healed them. 

ê And he wondered at the defectiveness of their 
faith. And he itinerated through the villages, 
teaching. 

7 And he called his twelve, and began to send 
them two and two; and gave them power over 
unclean spirits to cast them out. 


82 Mark 5:35 — Malphona 


è And he instructed them to take nothing for the 

journey, except a staff only; not a wallet, nor 
bread, nor brass in their purses; 

? but be shod with sandals, and not to be 
clothed with two tunics. 

10 And he said to them, Into whatsoever house 
you enter, there be until you go forth from 
thence. 

" And every one who will not receive you, nor 
hear you, when you are going out from thence, 
beat off the dust that is beneath your feet for 
their testimony. And Amen | say to you, That it 
shall be more tolerable for Sadum and for 
Amura in the day of the judgment, than for that 
city. 

12 And they went forth, and preached that they 
should repent. 

3 And many devils they cast out, and anointed 
with oil the sick, and healed many. 

And Herodes the king heard concerning 
Jeshu, for his name had become known; and he 
said, Juchanon the Baptizer hath risen from 
among the dead;°** therefore works of power 
are wrought by him. 

° Others said, He is Elia; and others, A prophet 
as one from the prophets. 

But when Herodes heard, he said, It is 
Juchanon whom | beheaded; he hath risen 
from® among the dead. 

17 For Herodes had sent and had taken 
Juchanon, and had cast him into the house of 
the bound, on account of Herodia, wife of 
Philipos his brother, whom he had taken. 

18 For Juchanon had said to Herodes, It is not 
lawful to thee to take the wife of thy brother. 
1° But Herodia herself was adverse to him, and 
wished to kill him, but she could not. 

20 Eor Herodes feared Juchanon, because he 
knew that he was a man righteous and holy, and 
he protected him, and was many (times) hearing 
him, doing, and hearing him favourably. 

?1 And there was a notable day when Herodes, 
in the house of his nativity, (b’beth yaldeh,) 
made a feast to his chiefs and kiliarchs®° and the 
heads of Galila; 

?? and the daughter of Herodia came in (and) 
danced; and she pleased Herodes and them 
who reclined with him. And the king said to the 
damsel, Ask of me whatever thou wilt, and | will 
give to thee. 


83 Mark 6:14 - The house of the dead 
8t Mark 6:14 — Powers 

3 Mark 6:16 — The house of the dead 
8° Mark 6:21 - Kiliarkee, 


?3 And he sware to her, Whatever thou shalt ask 
(of) me, | will give thee, unto the dividing of my 
kingdom. 

*4 Then went she out and said to her mother, 
What shall | ask of him? She saith to her, The 
head of Juchanon the Baptizer. 

*° And immediately she entered with solicitude 
unto the king, and saith to him, | will this hour 
that thou give me, upon a dish, the head of 
Juchanon the Baptizer. 

°° And greatly grieved was the king; but, for the 
sake of the oath, and the sake of the guests,°” 
he could not deprive®™ her. 

?7 But the king despatched at once a sentinel, 
and commanded that he should bring the head 
of Juchanon. And he went and cut off the head 
of Juchanon in the house of the bound, 

?8 and brought (it) in a dish and gave to the 
damsel, and the damsel herself gave to her 
mother. 

*° And his disciples heard and went, took up his 
corpse, and laid it in the place of the buried. 

°° And the disciples gathered unto Jeshu, and 
told him all whatever they had done, and 
whatever they had taught. 

And he said to them, Come and let us go into 
the desert alone, and rest a little while; for there 
were multitudes going and coming, (so that) they 
had not space even to eat; 

32 and they went to a wilderness district in a 
vessel by themselves. 

33 And many saw them as they went, and knew 
them; and into the waste ran they from all the 
cities, and were there before him. 

34 And Jeshu coming forth beheld the great 
assemblies, and had compassion upon them, 
they being like sheep which had no shepherd; 
and he began to teach them many things. 

°° And when much time had passed, the 
disciples came to him and said to him, This 
place is waste, and the time is great; 

°° send them away to go to the farms around us 
and into the villages, and buy for themselves 
bread, for they have nothing to eat. 

But he said to them, Give you them to eat. 
They said to him, Shall we go and buy bread for 
two hundred dinoreen, and give them to eat? 

38 But he said, Go see how many loaves you 
have here; and when they had seen, they said to 
him, Five loaves and two fishes. 

°° And he directed that they should make them 
all recline in companies upon the herbage; 


87 Mark 6:26 - Recliners 
88 Mark 6:26 — Or, defraud 


“° and they reclined in companies, by hundreds 
and by fifties. 

# And he took the five loaves and the two 
fishes, and looked up to heaven, and blessed, 
and brake the bread, and gave to his disciples to 
set before them: and those two fishes they 
divided among them all, 

“? and they all did eat and were satisfied. 

“3 And they took up the broken pieces, twelve 
baskets full, and from the fishes. 

“* Now they who had eaten bread were five 
thousand men. 

° And immediately he constrained his disciples 
to ascend into the bark, and to go before him 
across to Beth-tsaida, while he dismissed the 
assemblies; 

ê and when he had sent them away, he went to 
a mountain to pray. 

7 But when it was eventide, the bark was in the 
midst of the sea, and himself alone upon the 
land. 

“8 And he saw them that they were distressed 
with rowing; for the wind was against them. And 
in the fourth watch of the night Jeshu came to 
them walking upon the waters, (as though) he 
willed to pass by them: 

# but they beheld him walking upon the waters, 
and thought it was a spectre, and they cried out; 
50 for all saw him and were afraid. But he 
immediately spoke to them and said to them, 
Take heart, | am, fear not. 

51 And he ascended to them into the ship, and 
the wind was still: and they wondered greatly, 
and were astonished among themselves. 

32 For they understood not from that bread, 
because their heart was gross. 

53 And when they had crossed over, they came 
to the land of Genesar. 

54 And when they had gone forth from the bark, 
the men of the place at once recognised him. 

°° And they ran throughout all that land, and 
began to bring those who were greatly afflicted, 
bearing them on couchettes, to where they 
heard that he was. 

°° And wherever he entered, into villages and 
cities, they placed the sick in the streets, and 
besought from him that they might touch only 
the edge of his mantle; and all they who touched 
him were healed. 


7:1 And there gathered to him Pharishee and 
Sophree, who had come from Urishlem; 

* and they saw some of his disciples eating 
bread with their hands not washed; and they 
complained. 


3 For all the Jinudoyee and Pharishee, unless 
they carefully wash their hands, do not eat, 
because they hold the tradition of the elders; 

f and | (coming) from the market, unless they 
lave,® they eat not. And many other of those 
(things) there are which they have received to 
observe, (as) the baptisms of cups, and of 
measures, and of brasen utensils, and of beds. 
° And the Sophree and Pharishee questioned 
him, Why do not your disciples walk according to 
the tradition of the elders; but, while their hands 
are not washed, eat bread? 

ê But he said to them, Well prophesied 
concerning you Eshaia the prophet, you 
hypocrites;”” as it is written, This people with 
their lips honour me, but their heart is very far 
from me. 

7 But in vain do they reverence me while they 
teach, the teachings of the commandments of 
men.” 

8 For you have abandoned the commandment 
of God and hold the tradition of men, as the 
baptisms of cups and measures, and many 
things like these. 

* He said to them (moreover), You decently” 
suppress the commandment of God, that you 
may establish your tradition. 

° For Musha hath said, Honour thy father and 
thy mother; and whosoever curseth father and 
mother, the death he shall die. 

" But you say, If a man shall say to his father, 
or to his mother, My oblation, (be that) whatever 
from me thou mayest profit; 

? and you permit him not to do any thing for his 
father and his mother. 

13 But you reject the word of Aloha for the sake 
of the tradition which you have delivered: and 
many similar (observances) to these you 
practise. 

“ And Jeshu called the whole multitude, and 
said to them, Hear me, all of you, and 
understand: 

15 It is not that which is without the man, and 
which entereth into him, that can defile him: but 
that which proceedeth from him, that defileth a 
man. 

16 He who hath ears to hear, let him hear. 

17 But when Jeshu had gone into the house 
(apart) from the multitude, his disciples asked 
him concerning that parable. 


8 Mark 7:4 - Baptize 

°° Mark 7:6 - Assumers of faces 

ət Mark 7:7 — Sons of man 

?2 Mark 7:9 - Decenter, SCHAFF. "speciously" 


18 He said to them, How dull are even you! 
Know you not, that nothing from without that 
entereth a man can defile him, 

1'9 because it entereth not into his heart, but into 
his belly, and is cast out in the purgation which 
all food purgeth? 

20 But that which proceedeth from a man, that 
polluteth aman. 

1 For from within, from the heart of the sons of 
men, go forth evil thoughts, adultery, fornication, 
robbery, murder, 

? rapacity, malice, fraud, obscenity, an evil eye, 
blasphemy, vain-glory, folly; 

° all these evils come from within, and they 
defile a man. 

** Erom thence Jeshu arose and went to the 
confine of Tsur and of Tsaidon, and entered into 
a certain house: and he was unwilling that any 
man should know of him, but he could not 
conceal. 
°° For immediately heard a certain woman 
concerning him, whose daughter had an unclean 
spirit; and she came, (and) fell before his feet. 

But that woman was a Gentile of Phuniki of 
Suria, and she prayed of him to cast out the 
demon from her daughter. 

*’ But Jeshu said to her, Let the children first be 
filled; for it is not well to take the bread of the 
children and cast it to the dogs. 

?8 But she answering said to him, Yes, my Lord, 
yet the dogs also from beneath the table eat the 
crumbs of the children. 

*° Jeshu saith to her, Go; on account of that 
word, the demon hath gone forth from thy 
daughter. 

3 And she went to her house, and found her 
daughter lying on the couch, and [that] the 
demon had gone out from her. 

31 Jeshu again departed from the confine of 
Tsur and of Tsaidon, and came to the sea of 
Galila, on the confine of the Ten Cities; 

32 and they brought to him a blind man,” a 
stammerer, and besought him to lay upon him 
the hand. 

33 And he took him aside from the crowd by 
himself, and put his fingers in his ears, and spat, 
and touched his tongue. 

And he looked up to heaven, and sighed, and 
said to him, Be opened: 

3 and in that hour his ears were opened, and 
the bond of his tongue was loosed, and he 
spake plainly.” 


33 Mark 7:32 — Kharsha “deaf “ 
%4 Mark 7:34 - Ethphatach 
3 Mark 7:35 — Or, easily 


38 And he charged them that to no man they 
should tell this. But so much as he charged 
them, they the more proclaimed it; 

37 and they were exceedingly astonished, and 
said, He doeth every thing well; the deaf he 
maketh to hear, and them who spoke not, to 
speak. 


8:1 But in those days when the multitude was 
great and there was nothing for them to eat, he 
called his disciples, and said to them, 

? | have compassion on this multitude, for 
behold three days have they continued with me, 
and there is nothing which they may eat. 

3 And if it be that | send them away fasting to 
their houses, they will faint in the way; for some 
of them come from afar. 

His disciples say to him, Whence can any one 
here in the wilderness satisfy with bread all 
these? 

° And he asked them, How many loaves have 
you? They say to him, Seven; 

and he directed the multitudes to recline upon 
the ground, and he took those seven loaves, 
and blessed and brake and gave to his disciples 
that they should set, and they set before the 
assemblies. 

7 And there were fishes, a few: and also over 
them he blessed, and said that they should set 
them. 

è And they all ate and were satisfied, and took 
up the abundancies of the fragments, seven 
panniers. 

* Now the men who had eaten were about four 
thousand: 

10 and he dismissed them, and immediately 
ascended into a vessel with his disciples, and 
came to the region of Dalmanutha. 

" And there came forth Pharishee, and began 
to question with him, and they demanded of him 
the sign from heaven, tempting him. 

12 And he groaned in his spirit, and said, Why 
seeketh this generation the sign? Amen I say to 
you, There shall not be given the sign unto this 
generation. 

13 And he left them, and ascended into the ship, 
and went to that overland. 

“ And they had forgotten to take with them 
bread, and but one cake was with them in the 
ship. 

15 And he counselled them, and said to them, 
Look and beware of the leaven of the Pharishee, 
and of the leaven of Herodes. 


16 And they reasoned one with another, °° 
saying, Because we have no bread. 

17 But Jeshu knew, and said to them, Why 
reason you because you have no bread? do you 
not yet know nor understand? is your heart still 
hard? 

18 and eyes have you, and not see? and ears 
have you, and not hear? neither remember you? 
19 When those five loaves | brake to five 
thousand, how many baskets full of fragments 
did you take up? They said to him, Twelve. 

20 He saith to them. And when seven to four 
thousand, how many panniers of fragments 
when filled took you up? They say, Seven. 

* He saith to them, How do you not yet 
understand? 

22 And he came to Beth-tsaida; and they 
brought to him a blind man, and prayed of him to 
touch him. 

?3 And he took the hand of the blind man, and 
led him forth without from the village; and spat in 
his eyes, and laid (on them) his hand, and 
inquired whether he saw. 

?4 And he looked, and said, | see the sons of 
man as the trees, walking. 

3 Again he laid his hand upon his eyes, and he 
was restored, and he saw every thing clearly. 

2è And he sent him to his house, and told him to 
go not into the village, nor to inform any man in 
the village. 

“7 And Jeshu went forth and his disciples into 
the villages of Kesarea of Philipos, and he 
interrogated his disciples by the way, saying to 
them, What say men concerning me that | am? 
?8 But they answered, That (thou art) Juchanon 
the Baptizer; and others, that (thou art) Elia; and 
others, one from the prophets. 

?9 Jeshu said to them, But you, what say you 
concerning me that | am? Shemun Kipha 
answered and said to him, Thus art the 
Meshicha, the Son of Aloha the Living. 

°° And he charged them that to any one they 
should not tell concerning him. 

And he began to teach them, that it was to be 
that the Son of man should suffer much, and be 
rejected by the elders, and by the chief priests, 
and by the Sophree, and be killed, and that the 
third day he should arise! 

32 And he spake the word with them fully.’ And 
Kipha took him, and began to chide him. 

33 But he turned, and, beholding his disciples, 
reprehended Shemun, and said, Get thee 


°° Mark 8:16 — One with one 
9” Mark 8:23 - Or, what he saw 
38 Mark 8:32 - Or, with uncovered eye, openly 


behind me, Satana, for thou thinkest not that 
which is of Aloha, but that which is of the sons of 
men. 

34 And Jeshu called to the assemblies with his 
disciples, and said to them, Whoever will come 
after me, let him deny himself, and take up his 
cross, and come after me. 

3 For every one who willeth to save his life shall 
lose it; and every one who shall lose his life on 
account of me and on account of my gospel, 
shall save it. 

3° For what is aman profited, if the whole world 
he gain, and his soul be lost? 

37 Or what shall a son of man give (as) the 
compensation for his soul? 

38 For whoever shall be ashamed of me and of 
my words in this generation, sinful and 
adulterous, the Son of man will also be ashamed 
of him, when he cometh in the glory of his 
Father with the holy angels. 


9:1 And he said to them, Amen | say to you, 
There are some who are standing here, who 
shall not taste death, until they shall have seen 
the kingdom of Aloha come with power. 

? And after six days Jeshu took Kipha, and 
Jacub, and Juchanon, and led them up to a high 
mountain by themselves. And he was altered 
before their eyes: 

? and his raiment shone, and became 
exceeding white as the snow; as the sons of 
man on earth could not make white. 

“ And there were seen with them Musha and 
Elia discoursing with Jeshu. 

° And Kipha said to him, Rabi, it is good for us 
here to be: and let us make three tabernacles; 
for thee one, and for Musha one, and for Elia 
one. 

ê But he knew not what he said, for they were in 
fear. 

7 And there was the cloud, and it shadowed 
over them: and the voice was from the cloud, 
saying. This is my Son, the Beloved, him 
hear.” 

è And instantly, while the disciples looked, they 
saw no man, but Jeshu alone with them. 

* And while they were descending from the 
mountain, he charged them to tell no man what 
they had seen, until the Son of man should have 
arisen from the dead. 

10 And they held discourse among themselves, 
and inquired what was this word, when he 
should have arisen from among the dead. 


9 Mark 9:5 - Or, that here we may be 
10° Mark 9:7 — “Hono Beri chabiba leh shamaii” 


1! And they asked him, saying, How then say 
the Sophree that Elia must come before? 

12 He said to them, Elia doth come before, to 
restore" all things; and how it is written 
concerning the Son of man, that much he should 
suffer, and be rejected. 

13 But I tell you, Elia hath also come, and they 
have done to him whatever they would, as it is 
written concerning him. 

14 And when he came to his disciples, he saw 
with them a great crowd, and the Sophree 
questioning with them. 

° And immediately all the crowd saw him, and 
wondered, and ran to salute him. 

16 And he inquired of the Sophree, What dispute 
you with them? 

7 And one from the company answered and 
said, Malphona, '” | had brought my son to thee, 
because he hath a spirit which speaketh not; 

and when he seizeth him, he dasheth him, 
and teareth and grindeth his teeth, and he 
becometh dry. And | spake to thy disciples that 
they should cast him out, but they could not. 

Jeshu answered, and said to him, O 
generation that believeth not! how long shall | be 
with you? how long shall | tolerate you? bring 
him to me. 

2 And they brought him unto him: and when the 
spirit saw him, he immediately dashed him, and 
he fell upon the ground; and was convulsed, and 
was torn. 

?1 And Jeshu asked the father, How long is it 
from the time from which it was thus? He saith to 
him, Behold, from his childhood. 

*? And many times he casteth him into the fire, 
and into the waters, to destroy him: but whatever 
thou canst, help me, and have mercy upon me. 
?3 Jeshu saith to him, If thou canst believe, 
every thing can be to him who believeth. 

?4 And in a moment the father of the youth cried 
out, weeping and saying, | am believing; help 
the defect'™ of my faith. 

*° But when Jeshu saw the people running 
together, and assembling to him, he rebuked the 
unclean spirit, and said to him, Spirit, deaf and 
unspeaking! | command thee, come forth from 
him, and enter not into him again! 

6 And that devil cried greatly, and crushed him, 
and went forth. And he became as the dead; as 
that many would say, He is dead. 

“7 But Jeshu took him by the hand, and raised 
him. 

101 Mark 9:12 - Or, to prepare 
Mark 9:17 - Teacher, Doctor 
Mark 9:24 - Poverty, imperfection, defect 


102 
103 


?8 But when Jeshu had gone into the house, his 
disciples inquired of him by themselves, Why 
could not we cast him out? 

*° Jeshu said to them, This kind with nothing 
can be cast out, but by fasting and prayer. 

°° And when he had gone forth from thence, 
they passed into Galila: and he was not willing 
that any man should know of him. 

31 And he taught his disciples, and told them, 
That the Son of man would be delivered into the 
hands of men, and they would kill him; and that 
when he was slain, on the third day he should 
arise. 

32 But they understood not 
feared to ask him. 

33 And they came to Kapher-nachum: and when 
they had entered the house, he asked them of 
what they had argued in the way among 
themselves. 

But they were silent: for they had contended 
in the way one with another, who should be 
greatest among them. 

And Jeshu sat, and he called the twelve, and 
said to them, Whoever wills to be the first, shall 
be the last of all, and the servant of all. 

And he took a certain child, and made him 
stand in the midst: and he took him upon his 
arms, and said to them, 

37 Every one who receiveth (one who is) as this 
child in my name, me he receiveth: and whoever 
me receiveth, not me he receiveth, but Him who 
sent me. 

38 Juchanon said to him, Rabi, we saw a man 
casting out devils in thy name; and we forbad 
him, because he did not adhere to us. 

39 Jeshu saith to them, Forbid him not; for no 
man who doeth powerful works"” in my name, 
can soon speak of me that which is evil. 

“° He therefore who is not against you is for 
you. 

* For every one who shall give you only a cup 
of waters to drink in the name that you are of the 
Meshicha, Amen | say to you, He shall not lose 
his reward. 

42 And every one who shall offend one of these 
little ones who believe in me, it had been 
better'® for him that an ass-millstone had been 
set to his neck, and he had been cast forth into 
the sea. 


104 his word, and 


10% Mark 9:32 — Knew not 


Mark 9:39 - Powers 
Mark 9:42 - Or, more tolerable 


105 
106 


43 But if thy hand offend thee, '°” cut it off: 
better" for thee mutilated to go into life, than 
having two hands to go into gihana; 

“ where their worm dieth not, and their fire is 
not quenched. 

45 And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off: better for 
thee to go into life lame, than having two feet to 
fall into ginana: 

“6 where their worm dieth not, and their fire is 
not quenched. 

47 And if thine eye offend thee, root it out: better 
for thee that with one eye thou enter the 
kingdom of Aloha, than having two eyes to fall 
into the gihana of fire: 

8 where their worm dieth not, and their fire is 
not quenched. 

* For every (thing) with fire is salted, and every 
victim with salt shall be salted. 

°° Good is salt: but if the salt shall (become) 
insipid, how shall it be salted? Let there be in 
you salt, and in peace be one with another. 


10:1 And he arose from thence, and came to the 
borders of Jehud on the other side of the 
Jurdan: and great multitudes went thither to him; 
and he taught them again as he was 
accustomed. 

* And the Pharishee drew nigh, tempting him, 
and demanding whether it were lawful for a man 
to dismiss his wife. 

° He saith to them, What hath Musha 
prescribed? 

* But they say, Musha permitted us to write a 
writing of dismissal, and to send away. 

° Jeshu answered and said to them, On account 
of the hardness of your heart he wrote for you 
this commandment. 

ê But from the beginning the male and the 
female Aloha made them. 

’ For this cause a man shall leave his father and 
his mother, and shall cleave unto his wife; 

è and they two shall be one flesh: henceforth 
they are not two, but one flesh. 

What Aloha therefore hath conjoined, man 
may not separate. 

And his disciples asked him again in the 
house concerning this (matter). 

" And he said to them, Every one who shall 
send away his wife, and take another, 
adulterizeth. 

12 And if the wife shall leave her husband, and 
shall become another’s, she adulterizeth. 


107 Mark 9:43 - Or, causeth offence to thee 


108 Mark 9:43 - Or, more tolerable 


13 And they presented unto him children, that he 
should touch them: but his disciples rebuked 
those who presented them. 

14 But Jeshu, when he saw, was displeased, 
and said to them, Permit the children to come to 
me, and forbid them not: for of those who are as 
these is the kingdom of Aloha. 

15 Amen I say to you, That whoever shall not 
receive the kingdom of Aloha as a child, shall 
not enter into it. 

16 And he took them on his arms, and laid his 
hand upon them, and blessed them. 

17 And as he journeyed in the way, one ran, fell 
upon his knees, and asked him, saying, Good 
Teacher, what shall | do that | may inherit 
eternal life? 

18 Jeshu said to him, Why callest thou me 
good? none is good but one, Aloha. 

19 Thou knowest the commandments, Thou 
shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not steal, 
Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not witness false 
testimony, Thou shalt not injure, Honour thy 
father and thy mother. 

2 But he answered and said to him, Malphona, 
these all have | kept from my childhood. 

21 And Jeshu beheld him and loved him, and 
said to him, One thing is wanting to thee: go, sell 
all whatever thou hast, and give to the poor, and 
thou shalt have a treasure in heaven: and take 
up thy cross and come after me. 

*° But he was grieved at that word, and went 
away sorrowful: for he had great riches. 

?3 And Jeshu beheld his disciples, and said to 
them, How hard to those who have riches to 
enter the kingdom of Aloha! 

** But his disciples were astonished at his 
words. And Jeshu answered again, and said to 
them, My sons, how hard (is it) for those who 
trust on their riches to enter into the kingdom of 
Aloha! 

?5 It is easier for a camel to go through the hole 
of a needle, than for a rich to enter into the 
kingdom of Aloha. 
°° And they were the more astonished, and said 
among themselves, Who can be saved? 

*7 Jeshu beheld them and said to them, With 
the sons of men this is not possible, but with 
Aloha: for every thing is possible with Aloha. 

?8 Then began Kipha to say, Behold, we have 
forsaken every thing, and have cleaved to thee. 
°° Jeshu responded and said, Amen | say to 
you, There is no man who forsaketh houses, or 
brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, 
or children, or fields, on account of me, and on 
account of my gospel, 


3° who shall not receive a hundred-fold now in 
this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and 
mothers, and children, and fields, with 
persecution; and in the world which cometh the 
life that is eternal. 

31 But many (are) first who will be last, and last 
(who will be) first. 

32 Now when they were going up in the way to 
Urishlem, Jeshu himself preceded them; and 
they were amazed, and came after him, fearing. 
And he took his twelve, and began to tell them 
what it was which was to happen to him. 

33 Behold, we go up to Urishlem; and the Son of 
man (will be) betrayed to the chief priests, and to 
the Sophree; and they shall condemn him to the 
death, and shall deliver him to the Gentiles; 

34 and shall mock him, and scourge him, and 
spit in his face, and kill him: and the third day he 
shall arise. 

3 And Jacub and Juchanon, sons of Zabdai, 
approached him, saying to him, Malphona, we 
would that whatever we ask thou wilt do for us. 
°° He saith to them, What will you that | should 
do for you? 

37 They say to him, Give us that one may sit at 
thy right hand, and one at thy left, in thy glory. 

°° But he said to them, You know not what you 
ask: can you drink the cup that | drink? and 
(with) the baptism that | am baptized (with) can 
you be baptized? 

°° They say to him, We can. Jeshu saith to 
them, The cup that I drink you shall drink; and 
(with) the baptism that | am baptized (with) you 
shall be baptized: 

“° but that you sit on my right hand and on my 
left, is not mine to give, except for those for 
whom it is prepared. 

4 And when the ten heard, they began to 
murmur against Jacub and Juchanon. 

42 And Jeshu called them and said to them, You 
know that they who are considered the princes 
of the Gentiles are lords of them; and their great 
ones exercise power over them: but not thus 
shall it be among you. 

“8 But if any one among you willeth to be great, 
let him be to you the servant; 

and whoever of you willeth to be the first, he 
shall be the labourer for all. 

For even the Son of man came not to be 
served, but to serve, and to give his life the 
ransom for many. 

“6 And they came unto Jirichu. And as Jeshu 
went forth from Jirichu, he and his disciples and 
a great multitude, Timai bar Timai, the blind 
man, was sitting by the side of the way begging. 


47 And he heard that it was Jeshu Natsroia; and 
he began to cry out, and to say, Son of David, 
have mercy on me! 

“8 And many rebuked him, that he should be 
silent: but he cried out the more, saying, Son of 
David, have mercy on me! 

4 And Jeshu stood, and commanded that they 
should bring him. And they called the blind man, 
saying to him, Be of heart, rise, he calleth thee. 
°° But he, the blind, loosed his garment, and 
rose up, (and) came to Jeshu. 

51 Saith to him Jeshu, What wilt thou that | do 
for thee? And he, the blind, said to him, Rabi, 
that | may see. 

°? And Jeshu said to him, SEE: thy faith hath 
saved thee. And instantly he saw, and he went 
in the way. 


11:1 And when they drew nigh to Urishlem, 
against Bethphage and Beth-ania, at the mount 
of Olives, he sent two from his disciples, 

? and said to them, Go to that village which is 
over against you; and forthwith as you enter it, 
you will find a colt tied, which no man hath 
ridden; loose, bring him. 

3 And if any man shall say to you, Why do you 
this? say to him, Because for our Lord it is 
requested, and at once he will send him hither. 
* And they went, and found the colt tied at the 
gate without in the street. And as they were 
loosing, 

5 some of those who were standing said to 
them, What are you doing that you loosen the 
colt? 

ê But they said to them as Jeshu had instructed 
them; and they permitted them. 

7 And they brought the colt to Jeshu, and threw 
upon him their garments; and Jeshu rode upon 
him. 

ê But many spread their vestments in the way, 
and others cut branches from the trees and 
spread them in the way; 

and these who went before him, and these 
who came after him, cried, saying, Save now! 

10 and blessed be the coming kingdom"” of our 
father David: Save now, in the heights! 

11 And Jeshu entered Urishlem, into the temple, 
and surveyed every thing. And when it was the 
time of the evening, he went forth to Beth-ania 
with the twelve. 

12 And the day after, when he went from Beth- 
ania, he hungered. 


109 Mark 11:10a - Or, the kingdom which cometh 


110 Mark 11:10b — “Ushana bamraumee” 


13 And he saw a certain fig-tree from afar which 
had leaves on it, and he came to it, if he might 
find upon it somewhat; but when he came, he 
found on it only the leaves, for the time was not 
for figs (to have been ingathered). 

14 And he said to it, Henceforth and for ever 
man from thee fruit shall not eat. And his 
disciples heard. And they came to Urishlem. 

15 And Jeshu went into the temple of Aloha, and 
began to cast forth those who sold and bought in 
the temple, and he overthrew the tables of the 
money-changers, and the seats of them who 
sold doves: 

ê and he would not suffer any man to carry 
goods through the temple. 

17 And he taught, and said to them, Is it not 
written, That my house the house of prayer shall 
be called of all nations? but you have made it a 
den of thieves. 

And the chief priests and Sophree heard it, 
and inquired how they might destroy him; for 
they feared from him, because all the people 
admired his doctrine. 

19 And when it was evening, they went without 
from the city. 

20 And in the morning, while they passed by, 
they saw that fig-tree that it was dry from its root. 
21 And Shemun remembered and said to him, 
Rabi, behold, that fig-tree which thou didst curse 
hath dried. 

?? And Jeshu answered and said to them, Let 
there be in you the faith of Aloha. 

?3 Amen | say to you, That whosoever shall say 
to this mountain, Be lifted up, and fall into the 
sea, and shall not be divided in his heart, but 
shall believe that that thing which he speaketh 
is, he shall have the thing that he saith. 

?4 On this account | tell you, that every thing 
whatever you supplicate and ask, believe that 
you receive, and it shall be unto you. 

?5 And when you stand to pray, forgive whatever 
you have against any man; and your Father who 
is in heaven will also forgive you your 
transgressions. 

But if you do not forgive, your Father who is 
in heaven will also not forgive you your 
transgressions. 

And they came again to Urishlem: and as he 
walked in the temple, the chief priests and the 
Sophree and the elders came to him, 

78 and said to him, By what authority these 
things doest thou? and who gave thee the 
authority to do them? 

? But Jeshu said to them, | also will ask you 
one word, that you may tell me, and | tell you by 
what authority | these things do. 


°° The baptism of Juchanon, from whence was 
it? from heaven, or from the sons of man? Tell 
me. 

31 And they reasoned among themselves, and 
said, If we say to him, that (it was) from heaven, 
he saith to us, And why did you not believe him? 
% And if we should say, From the sons of man, 
there is fear from the people; for all have held 
Juchanon that he was truly a prophet. 

33 And they answered, saying to Jeshu, We 
know not. He saith to them, | also do not tell you 
by what authority | these things do. 


12:1 And he began to discourse with them in 
parables. A certain man planted a vinery, and 
surrounded it with an enclosure, and dug in ita 
wine-press, and built in it a tower, and gave it to 
be held by husbandmen, and journeyed. 

? And he sent to the husbandmen his servant in 
the time to receive the fruits of the vinery. 

? But they beat him, and sent him away empty. 
He sent to them again another servant; and 
also that one they stoned, and bruised him, and 

sent him away with dishonour. 

° And he sent again another, and him they 
killed; and many other servants he sent, and of 
them they beat, (and) of them they killed. 

ê But at last having one son, the beloved, he 
sent him to them; for he said, Now will they be 
confounded by my son. 

’ But those husbandmen said among 
themselves, This is the heir; come let us kill him, 
and the inheritance will be ours. 

è And they took and killed him, and cast him 
without from the vinery. 

* What therefore shall the Lord of the vinery do? 
He will come, destroy those labourers, and will 
give the vinery to others. 

'° And also that scripture have you not read, 
The stone which the builders rejected is become 
the head of the corner? 

11 from the Lorn is this done, and it is wondrous 
in our eyes. 

12 And they sought to apprehend him, but 
feared from the people: for they knew that 
concerning themselves he had spoken this 
parable. And he left them, and went. 

13 And they sent to him men from the Sophree 
and from the house of Herodes, that they should 
ensnare him in discourse. 

14 And they came and questioned him: 
Malphona, we know that thou art true, and that 
thou bearest not care for man: for thou regardest 
not the person of the sons of man, but in truth 
the way of Aloha thou teachest: Is it lawful to 


give head-money to Caesar, or not? shall we 
give, or shall we not give? 

15 But he knew their deceit, and said to them, 
Why do you tempt me? bring me the dinara, 
(that) | may see it. 

16 And they brought it to him. He said to them, 
Of whom (is) this image and writing? And they 
said, Of Caesar. 

17 Jeshu said to them, Of Caesar give to 
Caesar, and of Aloha to Aloha. And they were 
astonished at him. 

18 And the Zadukoyee came to him, those who 
say that (there is) no resurrection; and they 
questioned him, saying, 

Malphona, Musha has written for us, That if 
the brother of a man die, and leave a wife, and 
leave not children, his brother shall take his wife 
and raise up seed unto his brother. 

?° Seven brethren there were. The first took a 
wife, and died, and left not seed. 

?1 And the second took her, and died, and he 
also left not seed: and the third likewise. 

22 And the seven of them took her, and did not 
leave seed: last of all died also that woman. 

In the resurrection therefore, whose from 
them shall she be the wife? for the seven of 
them had her. 

*4 Jeshu saith to them, Do you not on this 
account err, because you know not the scripture, 
nor the power of Aloha? 

*° For when they rise from the dead, they take 
not wives, neither are wives (given) unto 
husbands; but as the angels that are in heaven 
are they. 

*® But concerning the dead, that they rise: have 
you not read in the book of Musha, how from the 
bush Aloha said to him, | am the God of 
Abraham, and the God of Ishok, and the God of 
Jacub? 

“7 And Aloha is not of the dead, but of the living. 
You therefore do greatly err. 

?8 And one from the Sophree approached and 
heard how they disputed, and, perceiving that he 
had well rendered to them the answer, inquired 
of him, Which is the first commandment of all? 

29 Jeshu saith to him, The first of all the 
commandments (is), Hear, Israel, The LorD our 
Aloha is one Lorb: 

3 and thou shalt love the Lorp thy God with all 
thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy 
mind, and with all thy strength: this is the first 
commandment. 

31 And the second, which is like it, (is) that thou 
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. Another 
commandment greater than these there is not. 


32 That Sophra said to him, Well, Rabi, and 
truly''' hast thou spoken: for One there is and 
no other than He: 

33 and that a man love Him with all the heart, 
and with all the understanding, and with all the 
soul, and with all the strength, and that he love 
his neighbour as himself, is better than all burnt- 
offerings and sacrifices. 

34 Jeshu, seeing that he had wisely returned the 
word, answered and said to him, Thou art not far 
from the kingdom of Aloha. And no man dared 
again to question him. 

® And Jeshu answered and said, while he 
taught in the temple, How say the Sophree that 
the Meshicha is son of David? 

°° For David himself saith by the Spirit of 
Holiness, The Lord’? said to my Lord, Sit thou 
at my right hand, until | set thy adversaries a 
footstool beneath thy feet. 

3% David therefore himself calleth him My Lord; 
and how is he then his son? And all the 
multitude heard him gladly. 

38 And in his doctrine he said to them, Beware 
of the Sophree, who will to walk in long robes, 
and love the shaloma in public places, 

°° and the chief seats in the congregations, and 
the head couches at suppers: 

1 they who devour the houses of widows, and 
for the occasion prolong their prayers: they shall 
receive the greater judgment. 

* And as Jeshu sat before the house of 
treasure, he beheld how the multitude cast 
money into the place of treasure; and many rich 
threw in much. 

42 And there came a certain poor widow, and 
threw in two menin, which are a shemona. '"? 

“8 And Jeshu called to his disciples, and said to 
them, Amen | tell you, That this poor widow 
more than all the men who throw hath thrown 
into the house of treasure. 

For all they from what is (super)abundant to 
them have thrown (in), but this from her 
deficiency all whatever she had; she hath thrown 
in her whole possession. 


13:1 And as Jeshu went forth from the temple, 
one of his disciples said to him, Malphona, 
behold, see those stones and those buildings? 
But Jeshu said to him, Seest thou these great 
buildings? There will not be left here a stone 
upon a stone which (will) not be destroyed. 


111 Mark 12:32 - “in truth you have spoken“ 


Mark 12:36 — Aramaic “Mor-Yah” 
Mark 12:42 - One eighth of a denarius 


112 
113 


3 And while Jeshu sat on the Mount of Olives 
before the temple, Kipha and Jacub and 
Juchanon and Andreas asked him by 
themselves, 

“Tell us when (these events) shall be, and what 
is the sign when these all draw nigh to be 
accomplished. 

° But he, Jeshu, began to say to them, See that 
no man deceive you. 

ê For many will come in my name, and will say, | 
am (He); and many will be deceived. 

7 But when you hear of battles and the rumour 
of wars, fear not: for it is that they are to be; but 
not yet is the end. 

è For people shall rise against people, and 
kingdom against kingdom; and earthquakes will 
he in various places; and there will be famines 
and convulsions. These are the beginning of 
sorrows. 

? But look (to) yourselves; for they will deliver 
you to the judgments; and in their assemblies 
will they scourge you, and before kings and 
governors you shall stand on account of their 
testimony. 

1° But first will be preached my gospel among 
all the nations. 

" But when they lead you to deliver you up, be 
not previously anxious what you shall say, nor 
premeditate; but that, whatever is given you in 
that hour, that say. For it is not you speaking, 
but the Spirit of Holiness. 

12 But the brother will betray his brother to the 
death, and the father his son; and children will 
rise up against their fathers, and shall put them 
to death; 

13 and you will be hated by all men on account 
of my name: but he who shall persevere to the 
end, he shall be saved. 

But when you see the unclean sign of 
desolation, that which is spoken of by Daniel the 
prophet, standing where it ought not,—he who 
readeth, let him understand!—then let those who 
are in Jehud flee to the mountain 

And he who is upon the roof, let him not 
descend nor enter in to carry any thing from his 
house; 

16 and he who is in the field, let him not turn 
back to take up his garments. 

But woe to those who are with child, and to 
those who give suck, in those days! 

18 But pray that your flight may not be in the 
winter: 

19 for in those days shall be affliction such as 
hath not been from the beginning of the creation 
which Aloha created, and until now, nor shall be. 


2 And unless the Loro cut short those days, no 
flesh would live; but on account of the elect 
whom he hath chosen, those days he hath cut 
short. 

?1 Then, if any man shall say to you, Behold, 
here is the Meshicha! and, Behold, (he is) there! 
believe not. 

?2? For there will arise false Meshichas and 
prophets of a lie, and will give forth signs and 
wonders, to deceive, if possible, the elect also. 
?3 But you, beware. Behold, | have told you 
every thing before. 

*4 But in those days after that affliction the sun 
will be darkened, and the moon will not give 
forth her light, 

?5 and the stars will fall from heaven, and the 
powers of the heavens will be moved. 

28 And then will they see the Son of Man coming 
in the cloud with great power and with glory. 

And then will he send his angels, and will 
assemble his chosen ones from the four winds, 
from the extremity of the earth to the extremity of 
the heavens. 

?8 But from the fig-tree learn a parable. When 
her branches are tender, and she shoots forth 
her leaves, you know that the summer draws 
nigh: 
P So also you, when you see that these things 
are done, understand that it is near, (even) at 
the door. 

°° Amen | tell you, That this race shall not pass 
until these all shall be. 

31 Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my 
words shall not pass away. 

3? But of that day and of that hour man knoweth 
not, nor the angels of heaven, nor the Son, but 
only the Father. 

33 Look: be watchful and pray; for you know not 
when the time is. 

34 For as aman who hath journeyed, and left his 
house, and hath given authority to his servants, 
and to every man his work, and the door-keeper 
he hath instructed to be watchful; 

(so) watch you, therefore, because you know 
not when cometh the Lord of the house,—in the 
evening, or in the dividing of the night, or at 
cock-crowing, or in the morning; 

38 lest he should come suddenly, and find you 
sleeping. 
°” But what to you | say, that unto all | say, Be 
watchful. 


14:1 But after two days was the Petscha of 
unleavened cakes:'"* and the chief priests and 
the Sophree sought how with guile they might 
apprehend and kill him. 

And they said, Not on the festival, lest there be 
a commotion among the people. 

3 And when he was at Bethania in the house of 
Shemun the leper, '”° as he reclined, there came 
a woman who had with her a vase of the balsam 
of the choicest nard of great prices; and she 
opened it, and poured it upon the head of Jeshu. 
“ But there were men of the disciples who were 
displeased among themselves, and said, Why 
make destruction of this balsam? 

5 for it could have been sold for more than three 
hundred dinoreen, and given to the poor. And 
they were angry with her. 

ê But he, Jeshu, said, Let her alone; why do you 
trouble her? A good work hath she wrought 
upon me. 

For in all time you have the poor with you, 
and, when you will, you can do them good; but | 
am not at all time with you. 

8 (With) that which was hers she hath done this, 
and beforehand as for the funeral she hath 
anointed my body. 

? And Amen | say to you, That wheresoever my 
gospel shall be preached in the whole world, this 
also which she hath now done shall be told in 
memorial of her. 

1° But Jihuda Scarjuta, one of the twelve, went 
to the chief priests, to betray Jeshu to them: 

"and they when they had heard rejoiced, and 
promised silver to give him. And he sought to 
him opportunity to betray him. 

12 And the first day of the unleavened bread, in 
which the Jinudoyee sacrifice the Petscha, the 
disciples say to him, Where wilt thou that we go 
to prepare for thee to eat the Petscha? 

3 And he sent two of his disciples, and said to 
them, Go to the city, and, observe, a man 
meeteth you bearing a vessel of waters. 

Go after him; and when he hath entered, say 
to the house-lord, Our Master saith, Where is 
the place of feasting, where | can eat with my 
disciples the Petscha? 

15 And, behold, he showeth you a large upper 
room furnished and prepared: there make ready 
for us. 


™ Mark 14:1 - Phatiree, "unleavened bread," plural; 


so called 

from phatar, "to send forth, liberate," in allusion to 
the Exodus. 

™ Mark 14:3 - garba also “pottery maker” 


16 And the disciples went forth, and came into 
the city, and found as he had told them: and 
they prepared the Petscha. 

17 And when it was evening he came with his 
twelve. 

18 And as they reclined and ate, Jeshu said to 
them, Amen | tell you, That one of you who 
eateth with me shall betray me. 

19 But they began to be sad, and said to him 
one, one, Is it I? 

*° But he said to them, One of the twelve who 
dippeth with me in the dish. 

2" And the Son of man goeth, as it is written 
concerning him; but woe to that man by whom is 
betrayed the Son of man! It had been better for 
that man if he had not been born. 

?? And while they were eating, Jeshu took 
bread, and blessed, and brake, and gave to 
them, and said to them, Take; this is my body. 

?3 And he took the cup, and praised and 
blessed, and gave to them; and they drank of it, 
all of them. 

24 And he said to them, This is my blood of the 
new Covenant, which for many is shed. 

*° Amen | say to you, That again | will not drink 
from the fruit of the vine till that day in which | 
will drink it newly in the kingdom of Aloha. 

°° And they praised, and went forth to the mount 
of Olives. 

?7 And Jeshu said to them, All of you will be 
offended with me in this night: for it is written, | 
will strike the Shepherd, and scattered shall be 
his sheep. 

?8 But when I have arisen, | go before you into 
Galila. 

?9 Kipha saith to him, If all shall be offended with 
thee, yet | (will) not. 

3 Jeshu saith to him, Amen | tell thee, That 
thou, to-day, in this (very) night, before the cock 
shall crow, three times wilt deny me. 

31 But he the more said, If | shall die with thee, | 
will not deny thee, my Lord. 

32 And so also all of the disciples said. And they 
came to the place which is called Gedsimon; 
and he said to his disciples, Sit here until | have 
prayed. 

33 And he took with him Kipha and Jacub and 
Juchanon, and began to be sorrowful and 
agonized. 

34 And he said to them, My soul is afflicted unto 
death; wait for me here, and be watchful. 

35 And he removed alittle, and fell upon the 
earth, and prayed that, if it were possible, the 
hour might pass from him. 


°° And he said, Father, my Father, thou canst 
(do) every thing, cause to pass from me this 
cup: but not my will, but thine. 

37 And he came and found them sleeping: and 
he said to Kipha, Shemun, dost thou sleep? 
couldst thou not one hour watch? 
°° Be wakeful and pray, that you enter not into 
temptation: the spirit is willing and ready, but the 
body | is infirm. 

3° And he went again, prayed, and said that 
word. 

“° And he turned again, came and found them 
sleeping, because their eyes were made heavy, 
and they knew not what to say to him. 

1 And he came three times (the third time), and 
said to them, Sleep on, and be at rest. The end 
approacheth, and the hour cometh, and, behold, 
the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of 
sinners. 

Arise, we will go; behold, he draweth nigh 
who betrayeth me. 

And while he was speaking, Jihuda Scarjuta, 
one of the twelve, came, and with hima 
multitude with swords and staves, from the chief 
priests and the Sophree and the elders. 

And the traitor who betrayed had given to 
them a sign, and said, He whom | shall kiss is 
He: take him carefully and lead him. 

4 And immediately he approached, and said to 

him, Rabi, Rabi, and kissed him. 

46 Then they laid on him their hands and seized 

him. 

“” But one of those who stood drew a sword, 

and struck the servant of the high priest, and 

took off his ear. 

“8 But Jeshu answered and said to them, As 

against a robber are you come out against me, 

with swords and with staves to apprehend me? 
? Every day with you was | teaching in the 

temple, and ye did not take me; but to fulfil the 

scriptures this is done. 

i sı Nen his disciples forsook him and fled. 

51 But a certain youth followed him, and he was 
covered (with) a linen cloth, naked; and they laid 
hold on him: 

* but he left the linen cloth, and escaped 
naked. 
53 And they led Jeshu to Kaiapha, chief of the 
priests: and were gathered together to him all 
the chief priests and the scribes and the elders. 
>* But Shemun from afar came after him, until 
within the court of the chief of the priests: and he 
sat with the servants, and warmed (himself) at 
the fire. 


°° But the chief priests and all the assembly of 
them sought against Jeshu testimony to put him 
to death, but they found not. 

°° For when many bore witness against him, 
their testimonies were not equal. 

°” But men rose up against him, witnesses of 
falsehood, and said, 

°8 We heard him say, | dissolve this temple 
which is made with hands, and in three days | 
build another not made with hands. 

°° But neither so was their testimony equal. 

€ And the chief of the priests arose in the midst, 
and questioned Jeshu, and said, Returnest thou 
no answer? what witness against thee these? 

ê1 But Jeshu was silent, and answered him 
nothing. And again the chief of the priests 
demanded, and said, Art thou the Meshicha, the 
Son of the Blessed?''® 

ê And he, Jeshu, said to him, | am: and you 
shall see the Son of man sitting at the right hand 
of the Power, and coming upon the clouds of 
heaven. 

ê Then the chief of the priests tore his robe, 
and said, Why now seek we witnesses? 

êt Behold, from his own lips you have heard the 
blasphemy: how is it seen by you? And they all 
judged that he was guilty of death. 

8 And some began to spit on his person, and 
they struck him on his face, and did buffet him, 
saying, Prophesy! and the servitors struck him 
upon his cheeks. 

°° And Shemun being below in the court, there 
came a certain damsel of the chief of the priests. 
ê She saw him as he warmed (himself), and 
knew him, saying to him, Thou also wast with 
Jeshu Natsroia. 

°° But he denied, and said, | know not what thou 
sayest. And he went without into the vestibule; 
and the cock crew. 

ê And again that damsel saw him, and she 
began to say to those who were standing, This 
man is also of them. 

’° But he again denied. And after a little while 
those who stood said to Kipha, Assuredly thou 
art from them, for thou art also a Galiloia, and 
thy speech is similar. 

7! But he began to imprecate and to swear, | 
know not this man of whom thou speakest. 

” And in the hour the cock crew the second 
time. And Shemun remembered the word that 
Jeshu had spoken to him, That before the cock 
should crow twice, three times thou shalt deny 
me. And he began to weep. 


6 Mark 14:61 - Meshicha Bareh dambarka 


15:1 And forthwith in the morning the chief 
priests with the elders and with the scribes and 
with the whole congregation made council; and 
they bound Jeshu, and led him and delivered 
him to Pilatos the governor. 

? And Pilatos asked him, Art thou the King of the 
Jihudoyee? And he replied and said to him, 
Thou hast said. 

3 And the chief priests accused him of many 
(things): 

* but he, Pilatos, asked him again and said to 
him, Returnest thou not an answer? see how 
many are witnessing against thee. 

° But he, Jeshu, did not give any answer; so 
that Pilatos admired. 

ê But he was accustomed at every festival to 
release to them of the bound one whom they 
requested; 

7 and there was one who was called Bar-aba, 
who was bound with the makers of sedition, they 
who murder in the sedition had committed. 

è And the people cried out and began to 
demand, that as he was used he would do to 
them. 

? But Pilatos answered and said, Will you that | 
release to you the King of the Jinudoyee? 

1° For Pilatos knew that for envy the chief 
priests had delivered him. 

1! But the chief priests the more incited the 
multitude, that Bar-aba he should release to 
them. 

12 But he, Pilatos, said to them, What then will 
you that | do to this, whom ye call King of the 
Jihudoyee? 

13 And they again cried,''’ Crucify him! 

14 Pilatos said to them, Why? what evil hath he 
done? And they the more exceedingly cried, 
Crucify him. 

15 But Pilatos was willing to serve the will of the 
people, and released to them Bar-aba, and 
delivered up to them Jeshu, scourged, to be 
crucified. 

16 And the soldiers led him into the court which 
is the praetorium, and called the whole band; 

17 and they robed him in purple, and twisted and 
set upon him a crown of thorns, 

18 and they began to salute him, Hail, King of 
the Jinudoyee! 

and they struck him upon the head with a 
cane, and spat in his face, and kneeled upon 
their knees and worshipped him. 

20 And when they had mocked him, they 
stripped him of the purple, and clothed him with 


"7 Mark 15:13 - Or, the more cried 


his own vestments, and led him forth to crucify 
him. 

=" And they constrained one who was passing, 
Shemun Kurinoia, who was coming from the 
field, the father of Alexander and of Rufus, to 
bear his cross. 

?? And they brought him to Gogultha, a place 
which is interpreted A skull. 

?3 And they gave him to drink wine which was 
mixed with myrrh; but he would not receive. 

4 And when they had crucified him, they parted 
his garments, and cast for them lots who should 
take them. 

?5 And it was the third hour when they crucified 
him. 

°° And there was written the occasion of his 
death in the inscription, This is the King of the 
Jihudoyee. " 

7 And they crucified with him two thieves, one 
on his right and one on his left; 

and was accomplished the Scripture which 
said, That with the wicked he was reckoned. 

*° And they also who passed by blasphemed 
against him, wagging their heads and saying, 
Ho, undoer of the temple and builder of it in 
three days, 

°° deliver thyself and come down from the 
cross! 

31 And so also the chief priests laughing one 
with one, and the Sophree, and saying, Others 
he saved, himself he cannot save. 

32 The Meshicha King of Isroel, let him descend 
now from the cross, that we may see and 
believe on him; and they also who were crucified 
with him reviled him. 

33 And when it was the sixth hour, there was 
darkness over all the land until the ninth hour. 
34 And in the ninth hour Jeshu cried with a high 
voice and said, Il Il, Lamona Shabaktoni! Which 
is, Alohi! Alohi!'’? why hast thou forsaken me? 
3 And certain who heard, of them who were 
standing, said, Elia he calleth; 

ê but one ran and filled a sponge with vinegar, 
and bound it on a rod that he might drink. And 
they said, Let alone, we will see if Elia cometh to 
take him down. 

’ But he, Jeshu, cried with a high voice, and 
completed: 

è and the veil'*° of the temple was rent in twain 
from the top to the bottom. 


120 


118 Mark 15:26 - Honu Malka d'Jihudoyee 


119 Mark 15:34 - My God, my God! 


120 Mark 15:38 - The faces of the gate 


°° But when that centurion who stood near him 
saw that he cried thus, and ended, (he) said, 
Assuredly this man was the Son of Aloha. 

° And there were women from afar who were 
beholding; Mariam Magdalitha, and Mariam 
mother of Jacub the less and of Josi, and 
Shaloom; 

*# those who, when he was in Galila, adhered to 
him, and ministered to him, and many others 
who went up with him to Urishlem. 

“2 And when it was evening of the preparation 
which is before the shabath, 

3? came Jauseph, he who was from Rometha, 
an honourable counsellor, who also himself 
waited for the kingdom of Aloha. And he took 
courage, and went in to Pilatos and requested 
the body of Jeshu. 

* But Pilatos wondered if he were now dead; 
and he called the centurion and asked him 
whether before the time he was dead: 

° and when he had learned, he gave the body 
to Jauseph. 

ê And Jauseph bought linen, and took him 
down and wrapped him in it, and laid him ina 
sepulchre which was hewn in the rock, and 
rolled a stone against the door of the sepulchre. 

7 But Mariam Magdalitha and Mariam, she who 
was (the mother) of Josi, beheld where he was 
laid. 


16:1 And when the shabath had passed Mariam 
Magdalitha and Mariam, (the mother) of Jacub 
and Shaloom, bought aromatics, and came to 
anoint him. 

* But in the morning of the first day in the week, 
they came to the sepulchre when the sun had 
risen, 

3 and they said between themselves, Who will 
roll away the Stone for us from the door of the 
sepulchre?” 

And they looked and saw that the stone was 
rolled away, for it was very great. 

° And they went into the sepulchre, and saw a 
youth sitting on the right. And he was clothed in 
a white robe. And they were astonished. 

ê But he said to them, Fear not! Jeshu Natsroia 
you seek, he who was crucified, he has risen; he 
is not here. Behold the place where he lay. 

’ But go, tell his disciples and Kipha that, 
behold, he goeth before you into Galila; there 
shall you see him as he told you. 

è And when they had heard, they fled, and went 
forth from the sepulchre, for astonishment and 


121 Mark 16:3 - The house of burial. 


tremor had seized them; and they said nothing 
to any one, for they were afraid. 

* But in the morning of the first day of the week 
he arose, and was first seen by Mariam 
Magdalitha, she who had seven devils cast out 
from her. 

10 And she went and declared to them who were 
with her, who mourned and wept. 

11 And they, when they had heard what they 
told, that he lived and had appeared to them, 
believed them not. 

12 After these things he appeared to two of them 
in another fashion as they walked and went to a 
village. 

13 And they went and told the rest, neither did 
they believe. 

14 But afterward he appeared to the eleven as 
they reclined, and he reproved the littleness of 
their faith and the hardness of their heart, 
because those who had seen that he had arisen 
they had not believed. 

15 And he said to them, Go into all the world, 
and proclaim my gospel to every creature: 
18€ He who believeth and is baptized is saved; 
and he who believeth not is condemned. 

17 And these signs shall follow those who 
believe: In my name they shall cast out devils, 
and with new tongues shall they speak; 

18 and serpents they shalt take up; and if the 
poison of death they drink, it shall not hurt them; 
and their hands shall they lay upon the sick, and 
they shall be healed. 

19 But Jeshu our Lord, after he had spoken with 
them, unto the heavens ascended, and sat on 
the right hand of Aloha. 

2 And they went forth and preached in every 
place, and our Lord helped them, and confirmed 
their words by the signs which they wrought. 


The Preaching of Lukos The Evangelist 


1:1 Because many have willed to record 
histories of those transactions of which we are 
persuaded, 

according to that which they have delivered to 
us, (they) who from the first were eye-witnesses 
and ministers of his doctrine; 

it appeared also to me, that having been 
intimately near to them all, | should record every 
thing in its order for thee, illustrious Theophile, 

* that thou mayest know the truth of those 
doctrines in which thou hast been instructed. 

° There was in the days of Herodes, king of the 
Jihudoyee, a certain priest whose name was 
Zakaria, of the service of the house of Abia, and 
his wife (was) of the daughters of Aharun; her 
name was Elishaba. 

ê And they were both just before Aloha, and 
walked in all his commandments, and in the 
righteousness of the Lorb, without blame. 

7 But they had no son because Elishaba was 
barren, and both had become many in their 
days. 

è But it was while he was acting-as-priest in the 
order of his ministry before Aloha, 

according to the custom of the priesthood he 
came to set on incense, and entered into the 
temple of the Lorb. 

'° And all the congregation of the people were 
praying without at the time of incense. 

11 And there appeared to him, to Zakaria, the 
angel of the Lorb, standing on the right hand of 
the altar of incense. 

12 And Zakaria trembled when he saw him, and 
fear fell upon him. 

13 And the angel said to him, Fear not, Zakaria, 
for thy prayer is heard, and thy wife Elishaba 
shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his 
name Juchanon. “2 

14 And to thee shall be joy and exultation, and 
many shall rejoice in his birth: 

15 for he shall be great before the Lorp, and 
wine and strong liquor'” shall he not drink, and 
with the Spirit of Holiness shall he be filled, from 
the womb of his mother. 

16 And many of the sons of Isroel shall he 
convert to the Lorp their Aloha. 

And he shall go before him in the spirit and 
the power of Elia the prophet, to turn the hearts 
of the fathers unto the children, and those who 


122 Luke 1:13 - Pronounced, Yu'hanan 


123 Luke 1:15 - Shak'ra 


believe not to the Knowledge of the righteous, 
and to prepare for the Lorp a perfect people. 

18 And Zakaria said to the angel, How shall | 
know this? for | am old, and my wife many in her 
days. 

19 And the angel answered and said to him, | 
am Gabriel, | stand before Aloha, and | have 
been sent to speak with thee and to announce to 
thee these things. 

20 Erom henceforth thou shalt be dumb, and 
shalt not be able to speak, till the day when 
these things shall be done, because thou hast 
not believed these words, which shall be fulfilled 
in their time. 

?1 But the people were standing, and expecting 
Zakaria. and were wondering at his delay in the 
temple. 

?? But when Zakaria had come forth, he could 
not speak to them; and he made them 
understand that he had seen a vision in the 
temple, and signing he signed to them, and 
remained dumb. 

*8 And when the days of his service were 
fulfilled, he came to his house. 

And it was after those days Elishaba his wife 
conceived, and she secluded herself five 
months. And she said, 

*° These things hath the Lorn done for me in 
the days of my desolation, to take away my 
reproach from among the children of men. 
© But in the sixth month Gabriel the angel was 
sent from before Aloha to Galila, to a city whose 
name (is) Natsrath, 

77 unto a Virgin espoused to a man whose 
name was Jauseph, of the house of David, and 
the name of the Virgin was Mariam. 

?8 And the angel entered to her, and said to her, 
Peace to thee, full of grace! our Lord is with 
thee, thou blessed among women! 

*° But she, when she saw, was troubled at his 
words, and reasoned what this salutation was. 
3 And the angel said to her, Fear not, Mariam, 
for thou hast found favour with Aloha. 

31 For, behold, thou shalt conceive, and shalt 
bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name 
Jeshu. 

32 He will be great, and the Son of the Most 
High shall he be called, and Aloha the Lorp 
shall give unto him the throne of David his 
father. 

33 And he shall reign over the house of Jakub 
for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no 
end. 


34 And Mariam said to the angel, How shall this 
be, because a man is not known to me? 

°° The angel answered and said to her, The 
Spirit of Holiness shall come, and the Power of 
the Most High” shall shadow over thee; on 
account of this He who (shall be) born from thee 
is the Holy, and the Son of Aloha shall be called. 
°° And behold, Elishaba thy kinswoman, she 
also beareth a son in her old age, and this is the 
sixth month to her,---to her who is called the 
barren. 

37 For nothing is difficult to Aloha. 

°° And Mariam said, Behold, | am the handmaid 
of the LORD, be it unto me as thou hast said. And 
the angel went from her. 

°° And Mariam arose in those days, and went 
with haste to the mountain to a city of Jehud; 

° and she entered into the house of Zakaria, 
and saluted’*° Elishaba. 

And it was that when Elishaba heard the 
salutation of Mariam, the infant leaped in her 
womb. And she was filled with the Spirit of 
Holiness; 

and she cried with a loud voice, and said unto 
Mariam, Blessed art thou among women, and 
blessed is the fruit of thy womb! 

43 Whence unto me is this, that the mother of 
my Lord should come to me? 

“* For, lo, as fell the voice of thy salutation on 
my ears, for great joy leaped the infant in my 
womb. 

4 And happy is she who hath believed, for there 
is a fulfilment of those things which have been 
spoken to her from the Lorb. 

ê And Mariam said: My soul doth magnify the 
LORD, 

47 And my spirit rejoiceth in Aloha my Saviour, 
“8 Who hath looked upon the lowliness of his 
handmaid: for, behold, from now all generations 
shall give blessedness to me. 

* Because he hath done for me great things, he 
who is mighty, and holy is his name. 

°° And his grace is for ages and generations 
upon those who fear him. 

°! He hath wrought victory with his arm; he hath 
scattered the proud in the thoughts of their 
hearts. 

°? He hath overturned the mighty from their 
thrones, and hath exalted the humble. 

°° The hungry he hath satisfied with good 
things, and the rich he hath sent away empty. 

54 He hath helped Isroel his servant, and hath 
remembered his mercy; 
14 Luke 1:35 - Eloia 


13 Luke 1:40 - Or, inquired for the peace of 


°° As he spake with our fathers, with Abraham 
and with his seed for ever. 

°° And Mariam stayed with Elishaba three 
months, and returned to her house. 

°” But to Elishaba had come the time that she 
should give birth, and she gave birth to a son. 
°8 And her neighbours and the sons of her 
family heard that Aloha had magnified his grace 
upon her; and they rejoiced with her. 

? And it was the eighth day, and they came to 
circumcise the child; and they called him by the 
name of his father, Zakaria. 

ê And his mother answered and said to them, 
Not so; but he shall be called Juchanon. 

ê1 And they said to her, No man in thy kindred is 
called by this name. 

ê And they signed to his father (to show) how 
he willed they should call him. 

ê And he requested a tablet, and wrote, and 
said, Juchanan is his name. And every man 
wondered. 

êt And immediately his mouth and his tongue 
were opened, and he spake, and blessed Aloha. 
ê And there was fear upon all around them; and 
in all the hill country of Jehud were these things 
spoken. 

ê And all who heard reasoned in their hearts, 
and said, What is this child to be? And the hand 
of the Lorp was with him. 
€ And Zakaria his father was filled with the 
Spirit of Holiness, and he prophesied, and said: 
°° Blessed be the Lor, the Aloha of Israel; for 
he hath visited his people, and wrought for him 
redemption, 
® And hath raised up for us the horn of 
redemption in the house of David his servant; 
70 As he spake by the mouth of his holy 
prophets, who have been from of old, 

” That we should be delivered from our 
adversaries, and from the hand of all who hate 
us; 
” To perform his grace with our fathers, and to 
remember his holy covenant; 
73 The oath which he sware to Abraham our 
father, that to us he would grant that, 

being delivered from the hand of our 
adversaries, without fear we might serve before 
him 
75 All our days in righteousness. 
’® And thou, child, the Prophet of the Most High 
shalt thou be called; for thou shalt go before the 
face of the Lorb, and thou shalt prepare his 
way; 
” To give the knowledge of salvation to his 
people in the forgiveness of their sins, 


78 Through the compassions of the grace of our 
Aloha; whereby the morn-splendour shall visit us 
from on high, 

7 To illumine those who sit in darkness and the 
shadow of death. And to direct our feet into the 
way of peace. 

2 And the child grew, and was strong in the 
spirit, and was in the desert till the day of his 
manifestation unto Isroel. 


2:1 Now it was in those days that there went 
forth a mandate from Augustus Caesar to enrol 
the people of his dominion. 

? This enrolment was first made under the 
government of Qurinos in Suria. 

And every man went to be enrolled in his city. 
And Jauseph also went up from Natsrath of 
Galila, unto Jehud, to the city of David, which is 

called Beth-lechem, because he was of the 
house and of the family of David, 

with Mariam his espoused while with child, 
there to be enrolled. 

And it was that while they were there, the days 
were fulfilled that she should give birth: 

and she brought forth her son, the first-born, 
and wrapped him in bandages, and laid him in 
the manger; because there was no place for 
them where they stayed. 
ê But there were shepherds in the country who 
were staying there, and keeping watch by night 
over their flocks. 
* And, behold, the angel of Aloha came to them, 
and the glory of the Lorp shone upon them; and 
they feared with great fear. 
10 And the angel said to them, Fear not; for, 
behold, | announce to you great joy, which shall 
be to all people: 
11 for there is born for you to-day the Redeemer, 
who is the Lorp the Meshicha, in the city of 
David. 
12 And this is to you the sign, You shall find the 
infant wrapped in bandages, and laid in a 
manger. 
13 And instantly there were seen with the angel 
many hosts of the heavens, glorifying Aloha, and 
saying, 
i Glory to Aloha in the heights, and upon earth 
peace and good hope for the sons of men. 

And when the angels were gone from them 
into heaven, the shepherds spake one with 
another, and said, Let us go unto Beth-lechem, 
and see the thing which the Lorp hath made 
known to us. 

16 And they came with speed, and found 
Mariam, and Jauseph, and the infant who was 
laid in the manger; 


17 and when they saw, they showed the word 
which had been spoken to them concerning the 
child. 

18 And all who heard wondered at those (things) 
which were told them by the shepherds. 

19 But Mariam kept all these words, and 
compared them in her heart. 

20 And those shepherds returned, glorifying and 
praising Aloha for all that they had seen and 
heard as they had been spoken to them. 

21 And when the eight days completed to 
circumcise the child, his name was called Jeshu, 
for he was so called by the angel before he was 
conceived in the womb. 

?2 And when were completed, the days of their 
purification according to the law of Musha, they 
carried him up to Urishlem, to present him "° 
before the LORD: 

?3 (as it is written in the law of the Lorp, That 
every male [who] openeth the matrix the holy to 
the Lord shall be called:) 

*4 and to offer the sacrifice as it is said in the 
law of the Lorpb, A pair of turtle-doves, or two of 
the young of pigeons. 

But there was a certain man in Urishlem, 
whose name was Shemun; and this man was 
just and righteous, and he had waited for the 
consolation of Isroel, and the Spirit of Holiness 
was upon him. 
°° And it was said to him from the Spirit of 
Holiness, that he should not see death, until he 
had seen the Meshicha of the Lord. 

? Behold, this man came in the Spirit to the 
temple, and when his parents?” brought in 
Jeshu the child, to do for him as it is 
commanded in the law, 

?8 he took him upon his arms and blessed 
Aloha, and said, 

*° Now dismiss thy servant, my Lord, according 
to thy word, in peace; 

3 For lo, mine eyes have seen thy grace, 

31 Which thou hast prepared in the face of all 
the nations; 

32 A light for the revelation of the peoples, and 
the glory of thy people Isroel. 

But Jauseph and his mother wondered at 
these words which were spoken concerning him. 

And Shemun blessed them, and said to 
Mariam his mother, Behold, this child is set for 
the ruin and uprising of many in Isroel, for the 
sign of contention. 


126 Luke 2:22 - Literally, that they might make him 


stand before 
17 Luke 2:27 - Fathers 


°° And through thine own soul shall pass a 
spear, that may be revealed the reasonings of 
the hearts of many. 

3° Now Chana, the prophetess, (was) the 
daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher; she 
was aged also in her days, and seven years with 
her husband had lived from her virginity. 

37 And she was a widow as of years eighty and 
four, and she removed not from the temple, and 
with fasting and with prayer she worshipped‘ in 
the day and in the night. 

38 And she also arose in that hour and 
confessed'®° the Lorp, and discoursed 
concerning him with all who were expecting the 
redemption of Urishlem. 
°° And when they had fulfilled every thing 
according to the law of the Lorp, they returned 
unto Galila, to Natsrath their city. 

“° But the child grew, and was strengthened in 
spirit, and was filled with wisdom; and the grace 
of Aloha was upon him. 

“’ And his relatives’*’ every year went unto 
Urishlem at the feast of Petscha. 

“2 And when he was a son of twelve years, they 
went up, as they were used, to the festival. 

“8 And when the days (were) fulfilled, they 
returned. But Jeshu, the child, remained in 
Urishlem, and Jauseph and his mother knew 
not. 

“* For they thought that he was with the sons of 
the company; and when they had gone the 
journey of one day, they sought him with the 
men and with any who knew him. 

45 And they found him not: and they returned 
again to Urishlem, and sought him. 

* And after three days they found him in the 
temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors, ° 
hearing them and questioning them. 

47 And all of them were astonished, as they 
heard him, at his wisdom and at his answers. 

ê And when they saw him, they wondered; and 
his mother said to him, My son, why hast thou 
done with us thus? for, behold, | and thy father 
with great anxiety have sought thee. 

* He saith to them, Why have you sought me 
(elsewhere)? Knew you not that (in) the house of 
my Father it behoveth me to be? 

°° But they did not comprehend the word that he 
spake to them. 


128 Luke 2:36 — Or, Hana 


Luke 2:37 — Or, served 

Luke 2:38 — Or, praised 
Luke 2:41 — Or, his men 
Luke 2:46 — Malphonee 


129 
130 
131 
132 


51 And he went down with them, and came to 
Natsrath, and was subject to them. But his 
mother kept all these words in her heart. 

52 But Jeshu increased in his stature, and in his 
wisdom, and in favour with Aloha and men. 


3:1 Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of 
Tiberios Cesar, in the government of Pontios 
Pilatos in Jehud, Herodes being chief’? of the 
Fourth in Galila, and Philipos his brother chief of 
the Fourth in Ituria and in the region of Trakona, 
and Lusania chief of the Fourth of Abilini; 

? in the high priesthood of Chanan and of 
Kaiopha, was the word of Aloha unto Juchanon 
bar Zakaria in the desert. 

3 And he came into the whole country about the 
Jurdan, preaching the baptism of repentance for 
the remission of sins. 

As it is written in the book of the words of 
Eshaia the prophet, who said, The voice which 
crieth in the desert, Prepare the way of the 
Lorb, And make straight in the plain the 
highways for our Aloha. 

5 All valleys shall be filled, And all mountains 
and heights be brought low, And the mound 
shall be a level (place), And the rough place a 
plain, 

ê And all flesh shall see the salvation of Aloha. 
7 And he said to those multitudes who came to 
him to be baptized, O brood of vipers, who hath 
showed you to flee from the wrath that cometh? 
è Work therefore fruits which are worthy of 
repentance. And begin not to say within 
yourselves that Abraham is father to us; for | tell 
you, that from these stones Aloha is able to 
raise up sons unto Abraham. 

? But, behold, the axe is laid at the root of the 
trees. Every tree therefore which good fruit 
maketh not, is cut down and into the fire falleth. 

And the assemblies inquired of him, saying, 
What then shall we do? 

" He answered and said to them, Whoever 
hath two tunics, let him give to him who hath 
none; and whoever hath food, so let him do 
(likewise). 

12 The publicans'™ also came to be baptized, 
and they said to him, Malphona, what shall we 
do? 

13 But he said to them, Demand not any thing 
more upon what is prescribed to you to require. 

14 And the military servants asked of him and 
said, What shall we also do? And he said to 


133 Luke 3:1 - Risha-rabioya 


134 Luke 3:12 - Mokasee 


them, Molest no man, oppress no man, and let 
your wages satisfy you. 

15 But while the people thought concerning 
Juchanon, and all of them reasoned in their 
hearts whether he were the Meshicha, 

1€ Juchanon answered and said to them, 
Behold, | baptize you with waters, but there 
cometh after me He who is mightier than I; He, 
the latchet of whose sandals | am not worthy to 
unloose; He shall baptize you with the Spirit of 
Holiness and with fire: 

17 He who, holding the fan in his hand, and 
cleansing his floors, gathereth the wheat into his 
garners, and the chaff he will burn in the fire 
which is not quenched. 

18 But many other things he also taught and 
preached to the people. 

19 But Herodes Tetrarka, because he was 
reproved by Juchanon concerning Herodia the 
wife of Philipos his brother, and concerning all 
the evil things which he had done, 

2 added this also upon all, and shut up 
Juchanon in the house of the chained. 

1 But it was when he had baptized all the 
people, and also Jeshu he baptized. And while 
he prayed, the heavens were opened, 

?2 and the Spirit of Holiness descended upon 
him in the bodily likeness of a dove: and the 
voice was from the heavens, which said, Thou 
art my Son the Beloved One, in thee | have 
delighted. 

?3 Now Jeshu himself was as a son of thirty 
years, and was considered the son of Jauseph 
bar Heli, 

%4 bar Mattath, bar Levi, bar Malki, bar Jani, bar 
Jauseph, 

?5 bar Mattha, bar Amuts, bar Nachum, bar 
Chesli, bar Nagi, 

*° bar Math, bar Matath, bar Shemri, bar 
Jauseph, bar Jihuda, 

’ bar Juchanon, bar Rosa, bar Zurbobel, bar 

Shelathiel, bar Niri, 

?8 bar Malki, bar Adi, bar Kusam, bar Elmudod, 
bar Ir, 

*° bar Jose, bar Eleazar, bar Juram, bar 
Mathitha, bar Levi, 
°° bar Shemun, bar Jihuda, bar Jauseph, bar 
Jonam, bar Eliakim, 

31 bar Malia, bar Mani, bar Mattha, bar Nathan, 
bar David, 

32 bar Jeshi, bar Ubid, bar Boos, bar Salmon, 
bar Nachshun, 

33 bar Aminodob, bar Aram, bar Chetsrun, bar 
Pharets, bar Jihuda, 

34 bar Jakub, bar Ishok, bar Abraham, bar 
Tarach, bar Nachur, 


3 bar Soruk, bar Aru, bar Pholeg, bar Ebor, bar 
Shaloch, 

°° bar Kainan, bar Arphakshad, bar Shim, bar 
Nuch, bar Lamek, 

3” bar Mathushalach, bar Chanuk, bar Jared, 
bar Mahloleel, bar Kainan, 

38 bar Anush, bar Sheth, bar Adom, who was 
from Aloha. 


4:1 But Jeshu, being full of the Spirit of Holiness, 
returned from the Jurdan, and the Spirit led him 
into the desert, 

? to be tempted forty days by the accuser. "° 
And he ate nothing in those days; and when 
they were fulfilled, afterwards he hungered. 

3 And the accuser said to him, If thou art the 
Son of Aloha, tell this stone to become bread. 

Jeshu answered and said to him, It is written, 
It is not by bread alone that the son of man 
liveth, but by every word of Aloha. 

° And Satana carried him up into a high 
mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of 
the earth in a little time. 

ê And the accuser’ said to him, To thee will | 
give all this power and the glory of it, which to 
me is delivered; and to whomsoever that | will, | 
give it unto him. 

If therefore thou wilt worship before me, thine 
shall be all. 

ê But Jeshu answered and said to him, It is 
written, That the Lorb thy Aloha thou shalt 
worship, and him only shalt thou serve. 

? And he caused him to be at Urishlem, and to 
stand on the pinnacle of the temple, and said to 
him, If thou art the Son of Aloha, throw thyself 
from hence beneath: 

1° for itis written, His angels he shall charge 
concerning thee to keep thee, 

" and upon their arms to bear thee up, that 
thou strike not thy foot against a stone. 

But Jeshu answered and said to him, It is 
spoken, Thou shalt not tempt the Lorp thy 
Aloha. 

13 And when the accuser had accomplished all 
his temptations, he removed from him for a time. 

And Jeshu returned in the power of the Spirit 
into Galila, and there went forth a report 
concerning him in all the region about them, 

and he taught in their assemblies, and was 
glorified of every one. 

ê And he came to Natsrath where he had 
grown up; 


135 Luke 4:2 - Akelkartsa 


136 Luke 4:6 - Akelkartsa 


and he went out, as his custom was, into the 
synagogue on the day of shabath, and he stood 
up to read. And there was given to him the book 
of Eshaia the prophet, and Jeshu opened the 
book and found the place where it is written, 
18 The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, Because 
he hath anointed me to evangelize to the poor, 
And hath sent me to heal the contrite in heart, 
To proclaim to the captives release, And to the 
blind, vision, And to assure the contrite by 
remission, 
1° And to proclaim the year of acceptance of the 
LORD. 
2 And he rolled the book, and gave it to the 
minister, and went and sat down; but the eyes of 
all them in the synagogue beheld him. 
?1 And he began to say to them, Today is 
fulfilled this scripture which is in your ears. 
*? And all witnessed him and wondered at the 
words of grace which proceeded from his mouth. 
And they said, Is not this the son of Jauseph? 
Jeshu said to them, You will perhaps say to 
me this proverb, Physician, heal thyself; and all 
that we have heard that you have done in 
Kapher-nachum do also here in your own city. 
4 But he said, | tell you assuredly, There is no 
prophet who is received in his (own) city. 
?5 For | say to you the truth, that many widows 
were in the house of Isroel in the days of Elia the 
prophet, when the heavens were shut up for 
three years and six months, and great famine 
was in all the land; 
°° and to none of them was Elia sent, but to 
Sarephath of Tsaidon, unto a woman a widow: 
*7 and many lepers were in the house of Isroel, 
in the days of Elisha the prophet, and not one of 
them was cleansed only Namon the Aramian. 
?8 And when they heard these things, they who 
were in the synagogue were all of them filled 
with anger, 
*° and they arose, forced him without from the 
city, and brought him to the brow of the hill on 
which their city was built to throw him from the 
rock: 
°° but he passed through them and went. 
And he went down to Kapher-nachum, a city 
of Galila, and instructed them on the shabath. 
And they were astonished at his doctrine, for 
with power was his word. 
33 And there was in the synagogue a man who 
had the spirit of an unclean devil, and he cried 
with a high voice, 
34 and said, Leave me, what to us and to thee, 
Jeshu Natsroia? art thou come to destroy us? | 
know thee who thou art, the Holy One of Aloha. 


°° And Jeshu rebuked him, and said, Close thy 
mouth, and come forth from him. And the devil 
cast him down in the midst, and came forth from 
him, and hurt him not any thing. 

°° And wonder seized on every man, and they 
spake with each other and said, What thing is 
this? for with authority and with power he 
commandeth the unclean spirits, and they go 
forth. 

37 And there went out the fame concerning him 
into all the region which surrounded them. 

38 And when Jeshu had gone forth from the 
synagogue, he entered into the house of 
Shemun; and the mother-in-law of Shemun was 
afflicted with a great fever, and they besought 
him on behalf of her; 

39 and he stood over her and rebuked the fever, 
and it left her, and she rose up at once and 
ministered to them. 

“° But at the setting of the sun all they who had 
diseased ones, who were diseased with various 
diseases, brought them to him, and he upon 
every one of them laid his hand, and healed 
them. 

*4 And he cast forth also devils from many, 
(they) crying out, and saying, Thou art the 
Meshicha, the Son of Aloha. And he rebuked 
them, and suffered them not to speak, for they 
knew that he was the Meshicha. 

“2 And at the dawn of day he departed, and 
went to a desert place; and the people sought 
him, and came to him, and held him, that he 
should not go from them: 

#3 but Jeshu said to them, To other cities also 
must | go to announce the kingdom of Aloha, for 
concerning this | have been sent. 

“* And he preached in the synagogues of Galila. 


5:1 And it was while the assembly gathered 
upon him to hear the word of Aloha, he stood 
upon the bank of the sea of Genesar; 

? and he saw two vessels standing by the sea- 
side, and the fishermen who had gone up from 
them, and were washing their nets. 

And one of them was of Shemun Kipha; and 
Jeshu ascended, sat in it, and directed that they 
should take"? it a little from the land into the 
waters; and he sat, and taught the multitudes 
from the vessel. 

“ And when he was silent from his discourses, 
he said to Shemun, Lead into the deep, and cast 
forth your nets for a draught. 


137 Luke 5:3 — Or, lead it 


° Shemun answered and said to him, Rabi, the 
whole night we have laboured and nothing have 
we taken; but at thy word I throw the net. 

ê And when they had this done, they enclosed 
great multitudes of fishes, and their net brake. 

And they signed to their companions, who 
were in another vessel, to come and help them. 
And when they had come, they filled those two 
vessels, so that they were nigh to be swallowed 
up. 

è But when Shemun Kipha saw, he fell before 
the feet of Jeshu and said to him, | pray from 
thee, my Lord, remove thee from me, for | ama 
man a sinner. 

* For amazement had seized him, and all who 
were with him, on account of the draught of 
fishes which they had taken. 

10 Even so also Jacub and Juchanon, sons of 
Zabdai, who were partners of Shemun. But 
Jeshu said, Fear not, from henceforth the sons 
of men shalt thou catch unto life. 

11 And they brought the vessels to land, and 
forsook every thing, and went after him. 

And when Jeshu was in one of the cities, 
there came a certain man who was wholly filled 
with leprosy; he saw Jeshu, and fell upon his 
face, and prayed of him, and said to him, My 
Lord, if thou art willing, thou canst make me 
clean. 

13 And Jeshu extended his hand, touched him, 
and said to him, | am willing; be clean. And in an 
instant his leprosy went from him. 

14 And he commanded him, Tell no man, but go 
show thyself to the priests, and offer the oblation 
for thy cleansing, as Musha ordained for their 
testimony. 

15 And the fame concerning him went forth the 
more, and much people were gathered together 
to hear him and to be healed from their 
diseases. 

16 And he passed away into the desert, and 
prayed. 

17 And it was on one of the days, while Jeshu 
was teaching, (certain) Pharishee and doctors of 
the law were sitting. And they had come from all 
the villages of Galila and of Jehud, and from 
Urishlem: and the power of the Lord was (there) 
to heal them. 

18 And some brought on a couch a certain man 
a paralytic; and they sought to enter, that they 
might set him before him. 

19 And when they found not how to bring him in 
because of the multitude of people, they 
ascended to the house-top, and sent him with 
his couch from the roof into the midst before 
Jeshu. 


2 And when Jeshu saw their faith, he said to 
the paralytic, Man, forgiven to thee are thy sins. 
21 And the Sophree and Pharishee began to 
reason and to say, Who is this who speaketh 
blasphemy? Who can forgive sins but Aloha 
only? 

?? But Jeshu knew their reasoning, and said to 
them, What reason you in your hearts? 

?3 Which is easier, to say, Forgiven to thee are 
thy sins; or to say, Arise, walk? 

** But that you may know that authority hath the 
Son of man in the earth to forgive sins,---he 
saith to the paralytic,---To thee | say, Arise, take 
up thy couch, and go to thine house. 

*° And immediately he arose before them, and 
took up his couch, and went to his house, 
glorifying Aloha. 

ê And amazement held every man; and they 
glorified Aloha, and were filled with fear, saying, 
We have seen to-day wonders. 

*7 After these things Jeshu went forth, and saw 
a tribute-taker, whose name was Levi, sitting at 
the house of tribute. And he said to him, Come 
after me: 
?8 and he left every thing, and arose, and went 
after him. 
*° And Levi made in his house a great feast; 
and there was a large company of tribute-takers, 
and of others that reclined with them. 
3 And the Sophree and Pharishee murmured, 
saying to his disciples, Why with tribute-takers 
and sinners eat you and drink? 
31 Jeshu answered and said to them, The whole 
do not require the physician, but they who are 
grievously ill. 

| am not come to call the just, but the sinners, 
to repentance. 
33 But they say to him, Why do the disciples of 
Juchanon constantly‘ fast, and pray also as 
the Pharishee, but thine eat and drink? 
3% But he said to them, How can you make the 
sons of the chamber fast, '“° while the 
bridegroom is with them? 
°° But the days will come when the bridegroom 
will be taken up" from them: then shall they 
fast in those days. 

He spake to them a parable: No man cutteth 
a piece from a new material,“ and fasteneth it 


138 


138 Luke 5:29-A great reception 


Luke 5:33 — Or, faithfully 

Luke 5:34 - d’teb’don dantsuomon “make them 
fast” 

Luke 5:35 — Or, exulted 

Luke 5:36 - Garment 


139 
140 


142 


upon an old garment; lest he rend the new, 
without completing the old with the piece that is 
new. 

37 And no man poureth new wine into old 
bottles;’“? lest the new wine burst forth, and the 
wine be shed, and the bottles perish. 

38 But they pour new wine into new bottles, and 
both are preserved. 

°° And no man, drinking old wine, immediately 
asketh new: for he saith, The old is softer. 


6:1 It was on the shabath, while Jeshu was 
walking among the corn, '“* and his disciples 
gathered the ears, and rubbed in their hands 
and ate (them). 
? But some of the Pharishee said to them, Why 
do you a thing which it is not lawful on the 
shabuth to do? 
3 Jeshu answered and said to them, And this 
have you not read, what David did when he 
hungered, and they who were with him? 
4 that he went into the house of Aloha, and the 
bread of the table of the Lorp he took, ate, and 
gave to them who were with him, that (bread) 
which was not lawful to eat, except by the 
priests only? 
° And he said to them, That the Lord of the 
shabath is the Son of man. 
ê And it was on another shabath (that) he 
entered into the synagogue, and taught. And 
there was a man whose right hand was dried: 
7 and the Sophree and Pharishee watched him, 
if he would heal on the shabath, that they might 
accuse him. 
ê But he knew their thoughts, and said to the 
man whose hand was dried, Rise (and) come 
into the midst of the assembly. 
? And when he had come and stood, Jeshu said 
to them, | ask you which is lawful to do on the 
shabath, good or evil, life to save or to destroy? 
1° And he beheld them all, and said to him, 
Stretch forth thine hand: and he stretched it 
forth, and his hand was restored as its fellow. 
But they were filled with envy, and spake one 
with another what they should do with Jeshu. 
But it was in those days that Jeshu went forth 
into a mountain to pray; and there remained he 
all night in the prayer of Aloha. 
13 And when the day brake, he called his 
disciples, and chose from them twelve, those 
whom he named Apostles, 


18 Luke 5:37 — Or, bags, skins 


144 Luke 6:1 — The place of grain 


14 Shemun, he whose name was Kipha, and 
Andreas his brother, and Jacub, and Juchanon, 
and Philipos, and Bar Tholmai, 

15 and Mathai, and Thoma, and Jakub bar 
Chalphai, and Shemun who was called the 
Zealous, 

1€ and Jihuda bar Jakub, and Jihuda Scaruta, '° 
he who was the traitor. 

17 And Jeshu descended with them, and stood 
in the plain, and a great assembly of his 
disciples and a multitude of people from all 
Jehud, and from Urishlem, and from the sea- 
coast of Tsur and Tsaidon, 

8 who had come to hear his words, and to be 
healed of their diseases; and they who were 
vexed by unclean spirits, and they were healed. 

19 And all the multitudes sought to approach to 
him, for the power went forth from him, and all of 
them he healed. 

20 And he lifted up his eyes upon his disciples, 
and said, Blessed are you poor, for yours is the 
kingdom of Aloha. 

?1 Blessed are you who hunger now, for you 
shall be satisfied. Blessed are you who weep 
now, for you shall laugh. 

*° Blessed are you when the sons of man hate 
you, and separate you, and revile you, and cast 
out your name as evil, for the sake of the Son of 
man. 

?3 Rejoice in that day, and exult, for your reward 
is great in heaven; for thus did they to your 
fathers the prophets. 

*4 But woe to you (who are) rich, because you 
have received your consolation. 

*° Woe to you (who are) full, for you shall 
hunger. Woe to you who laugh now, for you 
shall weep and lament. 
°° Woe to you when the sons of men shall 
speak well of you, for so did to the prophets of 
falsity their fathers. 

? But | say to you who hear, Love your 
adversaries, and do good to those who hate 
you, 

78 and bless those who execrate you, and pray 
for those who lead you by violence. 

?9 And to one who striketh you on your cheek, 
offer to him the other: and whosoever taketh 
your cloak, forbid him not your coat also. 

To every one who asketh of you give; and 
from him who taketh of yours demand not 
(again). 

31 And as you will that the sons of man should 
do to you, so do you also to them. 


**° Luke 6:16 - Or, S'karjuta 


146 Luke 6:28 - Or, with a chain 


32 For if you love them who love you, what is 
your grace? for sinners also love those who love 
them. 

33 And if you do good to those who benefit you, 
what is your grace? for the sinners also thus do. 
34 And if you lend to them from whom you 
expect to be recompensed, what is your grace? 
for sinners also lend to sinners, that they might 
be profited. 

°° But love your adversaries, and do good to 
them, and lend, and cut not off the hope of any 
one; and great shall be your reward, and you 
shall be the children of the Most High; for he is 
benign to the evil and to the ungrateful. 

°° Be you therefore merciful, as also your Father 
is merciful. 

37 Judge not, and you shall not be judged; 
condemn not, and you shall not be condemned; 
release, and you shall be released; 

give," and it shall be given to you; in good 
measure, compressed, redundant, '“ shall they 
pour into your bosoms. For in that measure you 
mete, it shall be measured to you. 

And he spake to them a parable: How can the 
blind lead the blind, and not fall into the ditch? 
“° The disciple than his master is not greater: 
but every man who is perfect shall be as his 
master. 

“ For why behold you the rod that is in the eye 
of your brother, but the rafter in your (own) eye 
is not seen by you? 

“ Or how can you say to your brother, My 
brother, permit (that) | pull out the rod that is in 
your eye, and behold the rafter in your own eye 
is not seen by you? Hypocrite! first take out the 
rafter from your own eye, and then shall you see 
to take out the rod that is in the eye of your 
brother. 

“3 A good tree maketh not evil fruits; also an evil 
tree maketh not good fruits: 

for every tree by its fruits is known. For how 
gather they from thorns figs? neither also from 
the bramble do they gather in grapes. 

4 The good man, from the good treasures 
which are in his heart, bringeth forth good 
things; and the evil man, from the evil treasures 
which are in his heart, bringeth forth evil things; 
for from the adundancies of the heart the lips 
speak. 

ê Why call you me, My Lord, my Lord, and the 
things which I say do not? 


“7 Luke 6:38a — Or, Release, absolve 


148 Luke 6:38b - Or, abundant 


“7 Every man who cometh to me and heareth 
my words, and doeth them, | will show you to 
whom he is like. 

“8 He is like a man who built a house, and 
digged deep, and laid the foundations upon the 
rock: but when there was an inundation, ° the 
inundation beat against that house, and it could 
not shake it, for its foundations were set upon a 
rock. 

“8 And he who heareth and doeth not, is like a 
man who built his house upon the dust, without 
a foundation: and when the river beat against it, 
it immediately fell, and the ruin was great of that 
house. 


7:1 And when he had finished all these words in 
the hearing of the people, Jeshu entered into 
Kapher-nachum. 

* But the servant of a certain centurion, who 
was valued by him, was sick, and nigh unto 
dying. 

? And he heard of Jeshu, and sent to him the 
elders of the Jinudoyee, and besought him to 
come (and) save his servant. 

* And they, when they came to Jeshu, besought 
of him earnestly, saying, He is worthy that thou 
do this for him; 

° for he loveth our people, and also a 
synagogue’”’ he hath built for us. 

And Jeshu went with them. But when he was 
not greatly distant from the house, the centurion 
sent to him his friends, saying to him, My Lord, 
labour not, for | am not worthy that thou shouldst 
enter beneath my roof. 

7 Wherefore | was not worthy to come to thee; 
but speak by a word, and my youth shall be 
healed. 
® For | also am aman who am subjected under 
authority; and there are under my hand soldiers, 
and I say to this one, Go, and he goeth; and to 
another, Come, and he cometh; and to my 
servant, Do this, and he doeth. 

? Now when Jeshu heard these (words), he 
admired, and turned and said to the company 
who came after him, | tell you, that not also in 
the house of Isroel have | found faith like this. 

And they who had been sent, returned to the 
house, and found the servant who had been sick 
now well. 

"' And it was the day after, that he went to a city 
whose name was Nain, and his disciples with 
him, and a great multitude. 
™ Luke 6:48 - Or, fullness, that is, of water 
Luke 7:5 - Beth kenushtha, "an house of 
assembly" 


150 


12 And as he approached the gate of the city, he 
saw (them) following (one) dead, who was the 
only born of his mother, and she his mother was 
a widow: and a great multitude of the people’ 
of the city were with her. 

13 And Jeshu beheld her, and had compassion 
upon her, and said to her, Weep not. 

14 And he went and touched the bier; and they 
who were carrying it stood. And he said, Young 
man, to thee | say, Arise.‘ 

15 And the dead sat up, and began to speak. 
And he gave him to his mother. 

'© And fear seized all men; and they glorified 
Aloha, saying, A great prophet hath arisen 
among us, and Aloha hath visited his people. 

17 And this word concerning him went forth into 
all Jihud, and into the whole region around them. 

18 And the disciples of Juchanon showed him all 
these. 

19 And Juchanon called two from his disciples, 
and sent them to Jeshu, saying, Art thou He who 
cometh? or another should we expect? 


*" But in that very hour he healed many from 
diseases, and from plagues, and from evil 
spirits; and to many blind he gave to see. 

And Jeshu answered and said to them, Go 
tell Juchanon every thing you have seen and 
heard: that the blind see, and the lame walk, and 
the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, and 
the dead arise, and the poor are evangelized; 
?3 and blessed is he whosoever is not offended 
in me. 

?4 But when the disciples of Juchanon were 
gone, Jeshu began to speak to the people 
concerning Juchanon: What went you forth into 
the wilderness to see? a reed from the wind 
shaken? 

?5 If not, what went you forth to see? a man 
clothed in soft raiment? Behold, they who are 
clothed in bright vestments, and are (living) in 
pleasures, are in the house of kings. 

6 If not, what went you forth to see? a prophet? 
Yes, | tell you, and more than a prophet: he, 
concerning whom it is written, 

7? Behold, | send mine angel'°’ before thy face, 
Who shall prepare the way before thee. 

?8 | tell you, that no prophet among those born 
of women (hath been) greater than Juchanon 


11 Luke 7:12 — Sons of the city 


Luke 7:14 — “Alima, lok amar-no, Koom” 
Luke 7:27a - “malakhi”, “my messenger” 
Luke 7:27b — Compare Malachi 3:1 


152 
153 
154 


the Baptizer. Yet the least in the kingdom of 
Aloha is greater than he. 

*° (And all the people that heard him, and the 
tribute-gatherers also, justified Aloha, because 
they were baptized with the baptism of 
Juchanon. 

30 But the Pharishee and Sophree rejected 
against themselves the will of Aloha, because 
they were not baptized of him.) 

31 With what therefore shall | compare the men 
of this generation, and to what are they like? 

3 They are like children sitting in the public 
place, and crying to their companions, and 
saying, We have sung to you, and you have not 
danced; we have wailed to you, and you have 
not wept. 

33 Eor Juchanon the Baptizer came, neither 
eating bread nor drinking wine, and you say, A 
devil is in him. 

The Son of man came eating and drinking, 
and you say, Behold a man a devourer and a 
drinker of wine, and a friend of tribute-takers and 
of sinners! 
°° But justified is wisdom of her sons. 

Now there came one of the Pharishee 
requesting of him to eat with him: and he 
entered into the house of the Pharisha, and 
reclined. 

87 And a woman, a sinner, was in that city; and 
when she knew that in the house of the Pharisha 
he reclined, she took a vase of ointment, 

38 and stood behind him at his feet and wept, 
and began with her tears to bedrop his feet, and 
with the hair of her head to wipe them, and she 
kissed his feet, and anointed (them) with the 
ointment. 

°° But when the Pharisha who had invited him 
saw (this), he thought within himself and said, 
Were this a prophet, he would know who this is 
and what is her report, for this woman is a sinner 
who toucheth him. 

But Jeshu answered and said to him, 
Shemun, | have somewhat to say to thee. He 
said to him, Say, Rabi. Jeshu said to him, 

“" A certain creditor'®> had two debtors: the one 
owed him five hundred dinoree, and the other 
fifty dinoree. 

42 And when they had nothing to pay, he 
forgave them both. Which, therefore, of them the 
most would love him? 

“3 Shemun answered and said, | think he to 
whom much was forgiven. Jeshu said to him, 
Thou hast judged rightly. 


15 Luke 7:41 — Lord of debt 


“* And he turned to that woman, and said to 
Shemun, Thou seest this woman: | entered thy 
house; waters for my feet thou gavest me not; 
but this with her tears hath bedropped my feet, 
and with her hair hath wiped them. 

4 Thou didst not kiss me; but, behold, this from 
(the time) | entered hath not ceased my feet to 
kiss. 

“© Thou with ointment my feet didst not anoint, 
but this with ointment of balsam my feet hath 
anointed. 

47 Therefore | tell thee, That forgiven to her are 
her many sins, because she hath loved much. 
For he to whom little is forgiven, little loveth. 

“8 And he said to her, Woman, forgiven to thee 
(are) thy sins. 

* But they who reclined said among 
themselves, Who is this who also sins forgiveth? 
°° But Jeshu said to that woman, Thy faith hath 
saved thee; go in peace. 


8:1 And it was after these things that Jeshu 
itinerated among the cities and villages, and 
preached and announced the kingdom of Aloha, 
and his twelve with him, 

? and those women who had been healed from 
infirmities and from evil spirits, Mariam who was 
called Magdalitha, she from whom he had cast 
out seven devils, 

3 and Juchana the wife of Kusa, chief of the 
household of Herodes, and Shushan, and many 
others, who ministered unto him from their 
possessions. 

“ And when a great multitude had assembled, 
and from all the cities had come to him, he 
discoursed in parables. 

° A sower went forth to sow his seed. And as he 
sowed, some fell by the road-side; and it was 
trodden down, and the fowl devoured it. 

ê And other fell upon the rock; and it 
immediately sprang up, and, because it had no 
moisture, it withered. 

7 And other fell among thorns, and they sprang 
up with it, and choked it. 

è And other fell into ground good and fair, and 
sprang up, and made fruit an hundredfold. And 
when he had said these (words), he cried, 
Whoever hath ears to hear, let him hear. 

* And his disciples asked him, What is (the 
signification of) this parable? 

1° But he said to them, To you it is given to 
know the mysteries of the kingdom of Aloha; but 
to those who are the rest in similitudes is it 
spoken; that while seeing they may not see, and 
while hearing they may not understand. 


1! But this is the parable: The seed is the word 
of Aloha. 

12 Now they by the road-side are they who hear 
the word; and the adversary cometh, and taketh 
up the word from their hearts, that they should 
not believe and be saved. 

13 But those who fell upon the rock are those 
who, when they hear, with joy receive the word; 
yet root they have not, but for a time is their 
faith, and in the time of temptation they are 
offended. 

14 But that which fell among thorns are they who 
hear the word, and by the cares, and by the 
riches, and by the lusts of the world, they are 
choked, and fruit they give not. 

15 But that which (was) in good ground are they 
who, with hearts humble and good, hear the 
word and retain, and give fruits with 
perseverance. 

No man lighteth a lamp, and covereth it with a 
measure, or setteth it under a bed; but setteth it 
upon a candlestick, that every one who cometh 
in may see the light of it. 

For there is nothing hidden which shall not be 
revealed, and nothing secret that shall not be 
known and come into openness. 

18 Take heed how you hear: for unto him who 
hath, it shall be given; and from him who hath 
not, that also which he thinketh that he hath 
shall be taken from him. 

19 Now came to him his mother and his 
brethren, and could not speak with him on 
account of the assembly. 

20 And they said to him, Thy mother and thy 
brethren are standing without, desiring to see 
thee. 

?1 But he answered and said to them, These are 
my mother and my brethren, they who hear the 
word of Aloha, and do it. 

2? Now it was on one of the days that Jeshu 
ascended and sat in a vessel and his disciples: 
and he said to them, Let us pass to the other 
side of the water. 

But as they went, Jeshu himself slept. And 
there became a storm of wind on the water, and 
nigh was the vessel to be swallowed up. 

?4 And they approached (and) awoke him, 
saying to him, Our master, our master, we 
perish! But he arose and rebuked the winds and 
the waves of the sea; and they quieted, and 
there was a calm. 

*° And he said to them, Where is your faith? But 
they, afraid, wondered, saying one with another, 
Who is this that also commandeth the winds, 
and to whom the waves and the sea are 
obedient? 


°° And they went forward and came to the 
country of the Godroyee, which is over against 
Galila. 

*7 And when he had gone forth to the land, 
there met him a certain man from the city, who 
had a devil in him a great time, and (who) wore 
no clothes, and in a house dwelt not, but in the 
place of the buried. 

?8 But when he saw Jeshu, he cried out, and fell 
before him, and said in a high voice, What to us 
and to thee, Jeshu, son of Aloha Marima?'® | 
beseech of thee, torment me not. 
°° For Jeshu commanded the unclean spirit to 
come forth from the man. For long 57 was the 
time that he had been enthralled of him; and 
(when) bound with chains, and kept with fetters, 
he had burst asunder his bonds, and had been 
driven by the demon into the waste. 

3 And Jeshu demanded of him, What is thy 
name? He saith to him, Legion: because that 
many devils had entered into him. 

31 And they besought from him that he would 
not cast them out to go into the abyss. 

Now there was there a great herd of many 
swine which fed on the hill: and they besought 
from him that he would permit them to enter into 
the swine. And he permitted them. 

33 And the demons went forth from the man, 
and entered into the swine; and the whole herd 
went directly to the precipice, and plunged into 
the waters, and were suffocated. 

34 And when the herdmen saw the thing that 
was done, they fled, and made known in the city 
and in the villages. 

3 And the men went forth to see the thing which 
was done. And they came to Jeshu, and found 
the man from whom the demons had gone out, 
clothed, sober, and sitting at the feet of Jeshu. 
And they feared. 
°° And they who had seen it showed to them 
how the man of the demon had been healed. 

37 And the whole multitude of the Godroyee 
besought of Jeshu that he would go from them, 
because great fear had taken them. And he, 
Jeshu, ascended the ship, and returned from 
them. 

38 But he, the man from whom had gone forth 
the demons, besought of him that he might be 
with him. But Jeshu dismissed him, and said to 
him, 
°° Return to thine house, and show what Aloha 
hath done for thee. And he went and proclaimed 
in every city what Jeshu had done for him. 

*® Luke 8:28 - God the Most High 


17 Luke 8:29 — Much, or great 


“° When Jeshu returned, a great multitude 
received him: for they were all expecting him. 
“' And a certain man whose name was Jorush, 
head of the synagogue, fell before the feet of 
Jeshu, and besought him to enter into his house; 
“? for he had an only daughter, as a daughter of 
twelve years, and she was nigh unto death. And 
as Jeshu went with him, the great multitude 
pressed him. 
“3 And a certain woman whose blood had 
gushed forth twelve years, she who among the 
physicians had spent all her substance, but 
could not be healed by any one, 

approached him from behind, and touched 
the border of his garment, and immediately 
stood the flowing of her blood. 

° And Jeshu said, Who touched me? And when 
all denied, Shemun Kipha and those with him 
said, Raban, '™ the crowd straiteneth and 
presseth thee, and sayest thou, Who touched 
me? 

“6 But he said, Some one hath touched me, for | 
know that power hath gone forth from me. 

47 And she, the woman, when she saw that she 
was not hid, came trembling and fell (and) 
worshipped him. And she told before all the 
people'” for what cause she had touched him, 
and how at once she had been healed. 

“8 But he, Jeshu, said to her, Be comforted, 
my daughter: thy faith hath saved thee, go in 
peace. 

“8 And while he was speaking, there came a 
man from the chief of the synagogue” and said 
to him, Thy daughter is dead, weary not the 
Malphona. 

°° But Jeshu heard, and said to the father of the 
damsel, Fear not, only believe, and she lives! 

51 But Jeshu came to the house, and he 
suffered no man to enter with him, save 
Shemun, and Jakub, and Juchanon, and the 
father of the damsel, and her mother. 

° And they were all weeping and wailing for 
her; but Jeshu said, Weep not, for she is not 
dead, but asleep. 

°8 And they laughed at him, for they knew that 
she was dead. 

54 But he put every man forth without. And he 
took her by the hand, and called and said, 
Damsel, arise. 


160 


*8 Luke 8:45 — Our Master 


Luke 8:47 - In the eye of all the people 
Luke 8:48 — Be of heart 

Luke 8:49 - Rab-kenushtha 

Luke 8:54 — “Talitha kumi” 


159 
160 
161 
162 


°° And her spirit returned, and she arose. And 
he directed that they should give her to eat. 

°° And her parents were astonished; but he 
cautioned them that no man they should tell 
what he had done. 


9:1 And Jeshu called his twelve, and gave them 
power and authority over all demons and 
diseases, to heal. 

? And he sent them to proclaim the kingdom of 
Aloha, and to heal the diseased. 

3 And he said to them, Take nothing for the way, 
neither staff, nor bag, nor bread, nor silver; nor 
two tunics shall you have. 

And into whatever house you enter, there be, 
and from thence go forth. 

° And whoever will not receive you, when you 
depart from that city the dust also from your feet 
shake off as a testimony against them. 

And the apostles went forth and itinerated in 
the villages and the cities, and evangelized and 
healed in every place. 

But Herodes, Tetrarka, heard all that was 
done by his hand, and was astonished; for men 
said that Juchanon had risen from the house of 
the dead. 

ê But others said that Elia had appeared, and 
others that a prophet from the former prophets 
had risen. 

* And Herodes said, The head of Juchanon | 
have cut off; but who is this of whom | hear 
these (things)? And he willed to see him. 

10 And when the apostles returned, they showed 
Jeshu all that they had done. And he took them 
by themselves to a desert place of Bethtsaida. 

" But the multitudes, when they knew it, went 
after him, and he received them, and discoursed 
to them concerning the kingdom of Aloha. And 
those who had need of healing he healed. 

12 But when the day began to decline, the 
disciples drew near and said to him, Send away 
the multitudes, that they may go to the villages 
and hamlets that are around, to lodge in them 
and to find for themselves victuals, because we 
are in a desert place. 

13 Jeshu said to them, Give you them to eat. But 
they said, We have nothing more than five 
loaves and two fishes, unless we go and buy 
food for all this people: 

14 for they were about five thousand men. Jeshu 
said to them, Make them recline in reclining 
companies, fifty men in a company. 

15 And the disciples did so. And they all 
reclined. 

16 And Jeshu took those five loaves and two 
fishes, and looked up to heaven and blessed 


and brake and gave to his disciples, that they 
should set before the multitude. 

17 And all did eat and were filled. And they took 
up fragments which abounded, twelve baskets. 

18 And as he was praying alone, and his 
disciples with him, he asked them and said, 
What say concerning me the multitude, that | 
am? 

19 They answered and say to him, Juchanon the 
Baptizer; and others that (thou art) Elia; but 
others that a prophet from the former prophets 
hath arisen. 

20 He saith to them, But what do you say that | 
am? Shemun answered and said, The Meshicha 
of Aloha! 

?1 But he forbade them and cautioned them that 
this they should tell no man. 

22 And he told them how it was to be (that) he 
the Son of man should suffer many things and 
be rejected by the elders and the chief priests 
and Sophree, and (that) they would kill him; and 
that on the third day he would arise. 

And he said before all, Whoever willeth to 
come after me, must deny himself, and take up 
his cross daily, and come after me. 

For whoever willeth to save his life, loseth it; 
but whoever (is willing) to lose his life, for my 
sake, he saveth it. 

*° For what is helped a son of man, if he shall 
gain the whole world and lose his soul, or 
perish? 

2 For whoever shall be ashamed of me and of 
my words, the Son of man will be ashamed of 
him, when he cometh in the glory of his Father 
with the holy angels. 

*” The truth I say to you, that some who are 
standing here shall not taste death, until they 
have seen the kingdom of Aloha. 

8 And it was after these words about eight 
days, that Jeshu took Shemun and Jakub and 
Juchanon, and went up into a mountain to pray. 
*° And while he prayed, the appearance of his 
countenance was changed, and his garments 
became white and shone. 

3 And, behold, two men talked with him, who 
were Musha and Elia, 

1 who appeared in glory; but they spake 
concerning his going forth which should be 
accomplished at Urishlem. 

32 And Shemun, and they who were with him, 
had been heavy with sleep, and were scarcely 
awaked when they saw his glory and those two 
men who stood with him. 

33 And when they began to depart from him, 
Shemun said to Jeshu, Rabi, it is good for us to 
be here: and let us make three tabernacles; for 


thee one, and for Musha one, and for Elia one. 
But he knew not what he said. 

34 And as he spoke these (words) there was a 
cloud which shadowed over them, and they 
feared when they saw that Musha and Elia 
entered into the cloud. 

°° And the voice was from the cloud, saying, 
This is my Son, the Beloved, Him hear. 

38 And when the voice had been, Jeshu was 
found alone. And they were silent, and told no 
man in those days what they had seen. 

37 And the day after when they had descended 
from the mountain, a great multitude met them. 
38 And a certain man from the multitude cried 
and said, Malphona, | beseech thee, turn unto 
me; (there is) my son, my only one, 

°° and a spirit passeth upon him, and he 
suddenly crieth, and gnasheth his teeth, and 
lacerateth, and hardly removeth from him when 
he hath bruised him. 

“° And | besought thy disciples to cast him out, 
but they could not. 

1 Then Jeshu answered and said, Ah 
generation unbelieving and perverse! how long 
shall | be with you and bear with you? Bring thy 
son hither. 

42 And as they brought him near, the devil cast 
him down and bruised him: and Jeshu rebuked 
that unclean spirit and healed the youth and 
gave him to his father. 

“8 And they all wondered at the majesty'® of 
Aloha. And while every one wondered at all 
which Jeshu did, he said to his disciples, 

44 Treasure these words in your ears; for the 
Son of man is to be delivered into the hands of 
men. 

4 But they understood not that saying, because 
it was hidden from them that they should not 
know it: and they feared to ask of him 
concerning that saying. 

ê And there entered among them the thought, 
Who should be greatest among them? 

’ But Jeshu knew the thought of their heart; 
and he took a child and made him stand with 
him. 

“8 And he said to them, Every one who 
receiveth a child like this in my name, receiveth 
me. And whosoever receiveth me, he receiveth 
Him who sent me. For he who is least among 
you, he shall be greatest. 

4 And Juchanon answered and said, Raban, '®* 
we saw a man who was casting out demons in 


183 Luke 9:43 — “Rabutha” 


164 | uke 9:49 — Our Master 


thy name, and we forbade him, because he 
came not with us after thee. 

5° Jeshu saith to them, Forbid him not; for he 
who is not against us, he is for us. 

51 And it was that when the days were fulfilled 
for his Assumption, he directed his face to go to 
Urishlem. 

52 And he sent messengers before his face, and 
they went and entered into a village of the 
Shomroyee, so as to prepare for him. 

53 And they would not receive him, because his 
face unto Urishlem was set to go. 

54 And when Jacub and Juchanon his disciples 
saw it, they say to him, Maran,'® art thou willing 
that we call fire to descend from heaven to 
consume them, as Elia did? 

°° But he turned and reproved them, and said, 
You know not of what spirit you are: 

°° for the Son of man is not come to destroy 
lives, but to save. And they went to another 
village. 

57 And while they went in the way, a certain man 
said to him, | will follow thee to the place whither 
thou goest, my Lord. 

Jeshu saith to him, The foxes have holes and 
the fowls of the heaven a shadow, but the Son 
of man hath not where to lay his head. 
°° And he said to another, Come after me. But 
he said to him, My Lord, permit me first to go 
bury my father. 

ê Jeshu said to him, Leave the dead burying 
their dead; and thou, go and preach the kingdom 
of Aloha. 

ê1 And another said to him, | will come after 
thee, my Lord, but first permit me to go to salute 
the sons of my house, and | will come. 

ê Jeshu saith to him, No man putting his hand 
upon the coulter of the yoke, and looking behind 
him, is fit for the kingdom of Aloha. 


10:1 After these Jeshu separated from his 
disciples seventy others, and sent them by two 
and two before his face to every place and city 
whither he was himself to come. 

? And he said to them, The harvest is great, but 
the labourers (are) few; pray therefore from the 
Lord of the harvest to send forth labourers into 
his harvest. 

° Go; behold, | send you as sheep among 
wolves. 

* Take with you neither purses, nor bags, nor 
sandals, neither with the salutation (shaloma) 
shall you salute any man in the way. 


18 Luke 9:54 — Our Lord 


° But into whatever house you enter, first say, 
Peace to the house!’ 

ê And if a son of peace be there, your peace 
shall descend upon him; but if not, your peace 
upon you shall return. 

But in that house be, eating and drinking of 
theirs: for worthy is the labourer of his hire. And 
remove not from house to house. 

è And into whatever city you enter and they 
receive you, eat such things as are set to you. 

* And heal those who are sick, and say to them, 
There hath drawn nigh upon you the kingdom of 
Aloha. 

10 But if any city which you enter will not receive 
you, go you out into the street and say, 

" Even the dust which cleaveth to our feet from 
your city we shake off against you; nevertheless 
know this, that hath come nigh upon you the 
kingdom of Aloha. 

12 I tell you that for Sadum it shall be more 
tolerable in that day than for that city. 

13 Woe to thee, Kurazin! woe to thee, 
Bethtsaida! for if in Tsur and Tsaidon had been 
wrought the miracles which were wrought in you, 
now long since in sackcloth and in ashes would 
they have repented. 

14 Nevertheless for Tsur and for Tsaidon it shall 
be more tolerable in the day of the judgment, 
than for you. 

15 And thou, Kapher-nachum, which unto 
heaven art lifted up, unto Shiul shalt thou be 
abased. 

1€ He that you heareth, me heareth; and he who 
you rejecteth, me he rejecteth; and he who me 
rejecteth, he rejecteth him who sent me. 

17 And the seventy whom he had sent, returned 
with great joy, saying to him, Our Lord, the 
demons also are subjected to us through thy 
name. 

18 Then he said to them, | saw him, Satana, 
when he fell as lightning from heaven. 

19 Behold, | give you power to tread upon 
serpents and scorpions, and all the strength of 
the enemy, and nothing shall hurt you. 
°° Nevertheless in this rejoice not, that the 
demons are subject to you; but rejoice that your 
names are written in heaven. 

7" In that hour Jeshu exulted in the Holy Spirit, 
and said, | praise thee, my Father, Lord of 
heaven and of earth, that thou hast hid these 
things from the wise and the intellectual, and 
hast revealed them unto children. Yes, my 
Father, for so was thy will. "° 
166 Luke 10:5 — “Sholoma lebaitha” 


187 Luke 10:21 - Or, so was the will before thee 


22 And he turned to his disciples, and said to 
them, Every thing is delivered to me by my 
Father: and no man knoweth who the Son is but 
the Father; and who the Father is but the Son, 
and he to whom the Son willeth to reveal. 

?3 And he turned to his disciples by themselves, 
and said, Blessed are your eyes because they 
see what you see; 

** for | tell you that prophets many and kings 
have desired to see what you see, and have not 
seen, and to hear what you hear, and have not 
heard. 

*° And, behold, a certain Sophra stood up to try 
him, saying, Malphona, what shall | do to inherit 
everlasting life? 

*° But Jeshu said to him, In the law how is it 
written, how readest thou? 

? He answered and said to him, Thou shalt love 
the Lorp thy Aloha with all thy heart, and with all 
thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all 
thy mind, and thy neighbour as thyself, 

*8 Jeshu said to him, Thou hast said correctly. 
This do, and thou shalt live. 

*° But he, willing to justify himself, said to him, 
And who is my neighbour? 

3 Jeshu saith to him, A certain man went down 
from Urishlem to Jerichu, and fell among 
robbers, who stripped him and wounded him, 
and left him with little life subsisting in him, and 
went. 

31 And a certain priest happened to go down by 
that way, and he saw him and passed over. 

32 And likewise also a Levoia, being come to 
that place, beheld him, and passed over. 

33 But a man, a Shomroya, while he journeyed, 
came where he was, and saw him, and had 
compassion on him, 

34 and went near, and bound up his wounds, 
and poured in upon them wine and oil, and set 
him upon his ass, and brought him to the inn, 
and was anxious for him. 

3 And on the morning of the day, he took out 
two dinoreen, gave to the host, and said to him, 
Take care of him; and if more thou layest out, 
when I return I will give to thee. 

°° Which therefore of these three doth it appear 
to thee was neighbour to him who fell into the 
hands of the thieves? 

37 And he said, He who had compassion on 
him. Jeshu saith to him, Go thou also and do 
likewise. 

38 And it was that as they went in the way, he 
entered into a certain village, and a woman 
whose name was Martha received him into her 
house. 


39 And she had a sister whose name was 
Mariam, and she came, sat at the feet of our 
Lord, and heard his words. 

“° But Martha was occupied with much serving. 
And she came and said to him, My Lord, carest 
thou not that my sister leave me alone to serve? 
Tell her to help me. 

41 Jeshu answered and said to her, Martha, 
Martha, thou art careful and disturbed about 
many, 

* but (there) is the one that is needed. And 
Mariam the good portion hath chosen, that 
which shall not be taken from her. 


11:1 And it was that while he was praying ina 
certain place, when he had finished, one of his 
disciples said to him, Our Lord, teach us to pray 
as also Juchanon taught his disciples. 

? Jeshu said to them, When you pray, thus be 
saying, Our Father who (art) in the heavens, be 
sanctified thy name. Come thy kingdom. Be 
done thy will as in the heavens also upon earth. 

3 Give to us the bread of our need every day, 

and forgive us our sins, for we also forgive all 
who are indebted to us. And lead us not into 
temptation, but deliver us from the evil. 

° And he said to them, Who of you that has a 
friend, and shall go to him at midnight, '®° and 
shall say to him, My friend, lend me three 
loaves, 

ê because a friend has come to me from the 
way, and | have nothing to set to him? 

7 and that friend from within shall answer and 
say unto him, Disturb me not, for the door is 
shut, and my children are with me in bed: | 
cannot rise and give to you. 

ê | tell you if for friendship’s sake he will not give 
him, (yet) because of importunity he will arise 
and give him as many as he needeth. 

* | say also to you, Ask, and it shall be given to 
you; seek, and you shall find; knock, and it shall 
be opened to you. 

10 For every one who asketh receiveth, and who 
seeketh findeth, and who knocketh hath it 
opened to him. 

' For what father (is there) among you who, if 
his son shall ask bread, will reach to him a 
stone? or should he ask a fish, how instead of a 
fish will he reach to him a serpent? 

12 or if an egg he shall ask, will he a scorpion 

reach to him? 

13 And if you, who are evil, know to give good 
gifts to your children, how much more will your 


168 Luke 11:5 - The dividing of the night 


Father from the heavens give the Spirit of 
Holiness to those who ask him! 

14 And he was casting out a demon which was 
dumb; and when he had cast out the demon, the 
dumb spake, and the multitudes wondered. 

' But some from them said, By Beelzebub, the 
prince of the devils, he casteth out devils; 

ê while others, tempting him, the sign from 
heaven demanded of him. 

17 But Jeshu, who knew their thoughts, said to 
them, Every kingdom which is divided against 
itself will be desolated; and a house that against 
its own self is divided falleth; 

è and if Satana against himself be divided, how 
will his kingdom stand? Because you say that 
through Beelzebub | cast out devils. 

* But if | by Beelzebub cast out devils, your 
sons, by what do they cast (them) out? On 
account of this they shall be your judges. 

20 But if by the finger of Aloha | cast out devils, 
there hath drawn nigh upon you the kingdom of 
Aloha. 

21 When the strong one armed keepeth his 
court, his possession is in peace; 

but if a stronger than he shall come, he shall 
overcome him; all his armour he taketh on which 
he depended, and he divideth his spoils. 

?3 He who is not with me is against me; and he 
who does not collect with me, by scattering he 
scattereth. 

?4 The unclean spirit, when he hath gone out 
from a son of man, goeth about through regions 
which have no waters in them, because he 
seeketh to him rest. And when he cannot find it 
he saith, | will return to my house from whence | 
went out. 

?5 And when he cometh he findeth it swept and 
ornamented. 

*® Then he goeth, taketh seven other spirits who 
are more wicked than himself, and they enter 
and dwell there, and the last of that man is 
worse ©’ than his first. 

?7 And while he spake these words, a certain 
woman lifted up her voice from the crowd, and 
said to him, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, 
and the breasts which thou hast sucked! 

?8 He said to her, Blessed are they who hear the 
word of Aloha and keep it. 

*° And when the assemblies had gathered 
together, he began to say, This evil generation 
requireth a sign; but no sign shall be given to it 
save the sign of Jaunon the prophet. 


189 Luke 11:26 — Some editions, read, bisho yathir, 


"far worse." 


°° For as was Jaunon a sign to the Ninvoyee, so 
shall also the Son of man be to this generation. 
31 The queen of the south shall rise in judgment 
with the men of this generation, and shall 
condemn them; for she came from the confines 
of the earth to hear the wisdom of Shelemun, 
and, lo, a greater than Shelemun is here. 

32 The men of Nineveh” shall rise in judgment 
with this generation and shall condemn it: for 
they repented at the preaching of Jaunon, and, 
lo, a greater than Jaunon is here. 

33 No man lighteth a lamp and setteth it in a 
secret (place) or under a measure, but upon a 
candlestick, that they who enter may see the 
light of it. 

* The lamp of thy body is thine eye; when 
therefore thine eye is simple, thy whole body 
also will be illuminated; but if it be evil, thy body 
also will be darkness. 

Beware, therefore, lest the light that is in thee 
become darkness. 
°° But if thy whole body be illuminated, and no 
part whatever in it be darkness, the whole will be 
light, as when a lamp with its flame enlighteneth 
thee. 

37 And as he was speaking, a certain Pharisha 
requested of him to dine with him, and he went 
in to recline. 

38 But he, the Pharisha, when he saw him, 
wondered that he had not first washed before 
his dinner. 

°° But Jeshu said to him, Now you Pharishee 
cleanse the outside of the cup and the dish, but 
within you are full of rapine and wickedness. 

“° Wanting in understanding! did not he who 
made that which is without, make also that 
which is within? 

“’ But of whatever there is, give in alms, and, 
behold, every thing is clean to you. 

? But woe to you, Pharishee! for you tithe mint, 
and rue, and every herb, and pass by judgment 
and the love of Aloha. These hath it behoved 
you to do, and those not to have omitted. 

Woe to you, Pharishee! for you love the chief 
seats in the assemblies, and the salutation in the 
public places. 

Woe to you, scribes and Pharishee, 
hypocrites! for you are like tombs that are not 
known, and men walk upon them, and do not 
know. 

45 And one of the Sophree answered and said 
to him, Doctor, while you say these things, you 
vilify us also! 


170 Luke 11:32 - “Gabree Ninvoyee,” the men the 


Ninevites 


“6 But he said, Also unto you, Sophree, woe! 
because you lade men with heavy burdens, and 
you with one of your fingers will not touch those 
burdens. 

“7 Woe to you! for you build the tombs of the 
prophets whom your fathers killed: 

8 thus you bear witness that you consent in the 
deeds of your fathers; for they killed them, and 
you build their sepulchres. 

“° On this account also Wisdom saith, Behold, | 
will send to them prophets and apostles; and of 
them they will persecute and kill; 

°° that the blood of all the prophets which hath 
been shed from the creation of the world may be 
required from this generation. 

51 From the blood of Habil unto the blood of 
Zakaria who was killed between the temple and 
the altar: yes, | tell you, It shall be required of 
this generation. 

Woe to you, Sophree; for you have taken 
away the key of knowledge; you enter not in 
(yourselves), and they who are entering you 
prohibit. 

53 And while he spoke these (words) to them, 
the Sophree and Pharishee began to be 
displeased, and they were wrathful, and 
controverted his words, 

5 and enticed him on many (points), seeking to 
lay hold on something from his mouth that they 
might be able to accuse him. 


12:1 And when (there) had gathered (by) 
myriads great assemblies, so that they would 
have trodden upon one another, Jeshu began to 
say to his disciples, Beware for yourselves 
before all things'”’ of the leaven of the 
Pharishee, which is hypocrisy. 

* For nothing is hidden which shall not be 
revealed, and nothing secreted which shall not 
be made known. 

° For all that you say in darknesses in the light 
shall be heard, and what you whisper in the ear 
in closets shall be proclaimed on the housetops. 

But | say to you, my beloved ones, Fear not 
them who kill the body, and who afterward can 
do nothing more; 

5 but | will show you whom you shall fear; ” 

Him who, after he hath killed, hath power to cast 
into gihana, yes, | say to you, Fear this (one). 

ê Are not five sparrows sold for two asorin; 
and one of them is not forgotten before Aloha. 


171 Luke 12:1 - Luq'dam, imprimis, chiefly 


172 Luke 12:5 - Or, of whom you shall be fearful, of 
Him, 


’ But of you, the numbers of the hairs of your 
head are all numbered. Fear not, therefore; than 
many sparrows more precious are you. 

ê But | tell you that every one who shall confess 
me before men, the Son of man will also confess 
him before the angels of Aloha. 

* But he who denieth me before men, | will deny 
him before the angels of Aloha. 

10 And every one who shall speak a word 
against the Son of man, it may be forgiven him; 
but whoever against the Spirit of Holiness shall 
blaspheme, it shall not be forgiven him. 

11 And when they bring you into the 
synagogues, before heads and authorities, be 
not anxious how you shall express 
yourselves,“ or what you shall say; 

12 for the Spirit of Holiness will teach you in that 
hour what you ought to say. 

13 And a man from the assembly said to him, 
Malphona, tell my brother to divide with me the 
inheritance. 

14 But Jeshu said to him, Man, who established 
me over you a judge and a divider? 

15 And he said to his disciples, Beware of all 
avarice: for life is not in the abundance of riches. 
16 And he spake a parable to them: The ground 
of a certain rich man produced him much 
provisions. 

And he thought within himself, and said, What 
shall | do? for | have not where to collect my 
provisions. 

18 And he said, This will | do: | will destroy my 
house of stores, and will build and enlarge it; 
and there will | collect all my provender and my 
good things: 

19 and | will say to my soul, My soul, thou hast 
many good things laid up for many years: be at 
ease, eat, drink, and be merry. 

°° But Aloha said to him, Reasonless (man) 
this night thy soul they shall require of thee; and 
then, (the things) which thou hast prepared, 
whose shall they be? 

=" So is he who layeth up to himself treasures, 
and towards Aloha is not rich. 

?? And he said to his disciples, Therefore | tell 
you, Be not anxious for yourselves, what you 
shall eat; neither for the body, how you shall 
dress: 

?3 for the soul is more precious than food, and 
the body than raiment. 


[v8 


173 Luke 12:6 - Value, three half pence 


Luke 12:11 - Tephakun rucho, how you shall put 
forth the mind 
175 Luke 12:20 - Chasir reyona, wanting reason 


174 


*4 Consider the ravens, which sow not nor reap, 
which have no chambers or barns, yet Aloha 
feeds them. How much, therefore, are you better 
than the fowls! 

*° And which of you by being anxious could add 
to his stature one cubit? 

ê But if indeed you are not capable of (that 
which is) the least, why concerning the rest are 
you anxious? 

*” Consider the lilies, how they grow, which toil 
not nor spin; but | tell you that even Shelemun in 
all his glory was not arrayed like one of these. 

?8 But if the herbage, which today is in the field, 
and to-morrow is cast into the furnace, Aloha 
thus clothes, how much more you, little in faith! 
*° And seek you not what you shall eat, and 
what you shall drink; nor let your mind be 
distracted for these: 

3 for all these the nations of the world seek; but 
to you also your Father knoweth that these are 
needful. 

31 But seek the kingdom of Aloha, and these all 
shall be added to you. 

? Fear not, little flock; for your Father hath 
willed to give you the kingdom. 

Sell your substance, and give alms: make to 
you bags which become not old, and a treasure 
which is not transient, in the heavens, where the 
thief does not approach, and the moth destroys 
not. 

34 Eor where your treasure is, there will be also 
your heart. 

°° Let your loins be bound, and your lamps be 
burning, 

°° and be you like men who wait for their lord, 
when he shall return from the place of festivity, 
that, when he hath come and knocked, 
immediately they may open to him. 

%7 Blessed those servants who, when their lord 
shall come, shall be found watching. Amen | tell 
you, He will gird his loins, and make them 
recline, and will come over and serve them. 

38 And if in the second or the third watch he 
shall come and find them thus, blessed will be 
those servants. 

But this know, that if the lord of the house had 
known in what watch the thief would come, he 
would have watched, and not have permitted his 
house to be dug through. 

Also you, be you therefore ready: for, in that 
hour that you think not, cometh the Son of man. 
# Shemun Kipha said to him, Our Lord, to us 
speakest thou this parable, or to all men also? 

Jeshu said to him, Who then is that steward, 
faithful and wise, whom his lord hath established 
over his service, to give the portion in its time? 


“8 Blessed that servant whom, when his lord 
shall come, he shall find so doing. 

“* Assuredly | tell you, He will establish him over 
all his substance. 

4 But if that servant shall say in his heart, My 
lord withholdeth to come, and shall begin to beat 
the servants and the handmaids of his lord, and 
shall begin to eat and to drink and be drunken; 
“6 the lord of that servant will come ina day 
when he thinketh not, and in an hour which he 
knoweth not; and shall sunder him, and set him 
his portion with those who are not faithful. 

47 And that servant who knew the will of his lord, 
and prepared not himself according to his will, 
shall be beaten with many. 

ê But he who knew not, and did that which was 
worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few 
stripes. For every one to whom much is given, 
much will be required from him; and to whom 
much is committed, the more will they require at 
his hand. 

4 Fire have | come to send forth upon the earth, 
and | would that it already burned: 

and | have a baptism (wherewith) to be 
baptized, and greatly am | pressed till it be 
completed. 

Suppose you that peace | have come to send 
forth on the earth? I tell you, not (peace), but 
divisions. 
°? For from henceforth there will be five in one 
house, who (will be) divided, three against two, 
and two against three. 
°8 For the father will be divided against his son, 
and the son against his father; the mother 
against her daughter, and the daughter against 
her mother; the mother-in-law against the 
daughter-in-law and the daughter-in-law against 
the mother-in-law. 

54 And he said to the assembly, When you see 
a cloud arisen from the west, immediately you 
say, The rain cometh; and it is so: 

°° and when bloweth the south, you say, It 
becomes heat; and it is so. 

°° You hypocrites, the aspect of the sky and of 
the earth you know to distinguish; but this Time 
how do you not distinguish? 

°” But why of yourselves judge you not the 
truth? 

°® When thou art going with thine adversary to 
the magistrate, while in the way, negotiate, and 
be freed from him; lest he bring thee to the 
judge, and the judge deliver thee to the exactor, 
and the exactor cast thee into the house of the 
bound; 


°° and Amen I tell thee, Thou wilt not be 
delivered from thence till thou shalt have given 
the last shomona. 


13:1 Now at that time came some and told him 
of the Galiloyee, they whose blood Pilatos had 
mingled with their sacrifices. 

? Jeshu answered and said to them, Think you 
that these Galiloyee were sinners more than all 
the Galiloyee, that thus it was (with) them? 

3 No; but | tell you that all of you also, if you 
repent not, will thus perish. 

Or those eighteen on whom fell the tower in 
Silucha, and killed them; think you that they 
were sinners above all men who dwell in 
Urishlem? 

5 No; but I tell you that, if you repent not, all of 
you likewise shall perish. 

ê And he spake this parable: A man had a fig- 
tree which was planted in his vinery: and he 
came and sought fruits on it, but did not find. 

7 And he said to the husbandman, Behold, three 
years come | seeking fruits from this fig-tree, but 
| have not found: cut it down; why maketh it the 
ground useless? 

The husbandman saith to him, My lord, suffer 
it also this year, until | tend it and manure it: 

? and if it produce fruits, (well): but if not, then 
afterwards | will cut it down. 

1° As Jeshu was teaching on a shabath in one 
of the synagogues, 

a woman was there who had a spirit of 
infirmity eighteen years; and she was bowed 
down, and could not be straight at all. 

12 But Jeshu saw her, and called her, and said 
to her, Woman, thou art loosed from thine 
infirmity. 

13 And he laid his hand upon her; and at once 
she was made straight, and glorified Aloha. 

But the chief of the synagogue answered, 
being angry that Jeshu had healed on the 
shabath, and said to the congregation, Six days 
there are in which it is lawful to work: in them 
come and be healed, and not on the day of 
shabath. 

15 But Jeshu answered and said to him, 
Hypocrite, doth not any one of you on the 
shabath loose his ox or his ass from the manger, 
and going giveth to drink? 

16 But this daughter of Abraham, whom, behold, 
the Accuser"? hath bound eighteen years, is it 
not lawful to loose from this binding on the day 
of shabath? 


16 Luke 13:16 - Akelkartsa 


17 And as he said these things, ashamed were 
all they who had risen up against him; and all 
the people rejoiced in all these wonders that 
were done by his hand. 

18 Jeshu said, What doth the kingdom of Aloha 
resemble, and to what shall | compare it? 

19 It resembles a grain of mustard,'”’ which a 
man took (and) cast into his garden: and it grew, 
and became a great tree; and the fowl of the 
heaven built in its branches. 

*° Jeshu said again, To what shall | compare 
the kingdom of Aloha? 

7" It is like leaven which a woman took; (and) 
hid in three satas of meal, until all had leavened. 
?2 And he journeyed, teaching in the villages 
and in the cities, and going forwards to 
Urishlem. 

?3 One had demanded (of) him if they are few 
who are saved. 

** But Jeshu said to them, Strive to enter in at 
the strait gate: for | say to you that many will 
seek to enter in, but shall not be able. 

*° From the hour that the Lord of the house shall 
have risen up and have shut the door, you may 
stand without, knocking at the door, and may 
begin to say, Our Lord, our Lord, open to us! But 
he will answer and say, | tell you that | Know not 
whence you are. 

?8 And you shall begin to say, Before thee we 
have eaten and drunk, and in our streets thou 
hast taught. 

?7 And he shall say to you, | know you not 
whence you are: depart from me, workers of 
falsity. 

?8 There will be weeping and gnashing of teeth, 
when you shall see Abraham and Ishok and 
Jakub and all the prophets in the kingdom of 
Aloha, but you be cast forth without. 

*° And they shall come from the east, and from 
the west, and from the south, and from the 
north, and shall recline in the kingdom of Aloha. 
°° And, behold, there are last who shall be first, 
and there are first who shall be last. 

31 In that day came men from the Pharishee, 
saying to him, Remove, go from hence, because 
Herodes desireth to kill thee. 

32 Jeshu saith to them, Go, tell that fox, Behold, 
| cast out devils and perform cures to-day and 
to-morrow, and the third day | am perfected. 

33 Nevertheless it behoveth me to-day and to- 
morrow to work and the (day) after | shall go; 
because it cannot be that a prophet perish out of 
Urishlem. 


177 Luke 13:19 - Chardala, Sinapis orientalis 


34 Urishlem, Urishlem! killing the prophets, and 
stoning them that are sent to her, what times 
would | have gathered thy sons as the hen 
gathereth her chickens under her wings, and 
you willed not! 

°° Behold, left to you is your house a desert; for 
| say to you, that you will not see me until you 
shall say, Blessed is he who cometh in the name 
of the Lorb. 


14:1 And it was that while he went into the 
house of one of the chief Pharishee to eat 
bread, on the day of shabath, they watched him. 
? And, behold, a certain man who had gathered 
waters"? was before him. 

3 And Jeshu answered and said to the Sophree 
and the Pharishee, Is it lawful on the shabath to 
heal? 

* But they were silent. And he took him, and 
healed him, and dismissed him. 

° And he said to them, Who from you, whose 
son or his ox hath fallen into a pit on the day of 
shabath, doth not at once bring him forth? 

And they could not give him the answer 
concerning this. 

And he spoke a parable to them who had 
been invited there, forasmuch as he had 
observed them, that they chose the chief places 
of reclining: 

ê When thou art invited by one into the house of 
festivity, go not to recline on the principal seat, 
lest there be invited thither one more honourable 
than thou; 

? and he come who thyself and him had called, 
and say to thee, Give place to this; and thou be 
ashamed as thou arisest to take another place. 
1° But when thou art invited, go, recline thee in 
the last (seat), that when he who called thee 
cometh, he may say to thee, My friend, ascend 
and recline above, and thou shalt have honour 
before all of them who recline with thee. 

1 For every one who exalteth himself shall be 
humbled; and every one who humbleth himself 
shall be exalted. 

* And he said to him who had called him, When 
thou makest a dinner or a supper, thou 
shouldest not call thy friends, nor thy brethren, 
nor thy kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbours, lest 
they also call thee, and thou have this 
recompence. 

13 But when thou makest a feast,” call the 
poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind, 


179 


178 Luke 14:2 - Daknish vo mdyo, an expression for 
the dropsy 


14 and thou shalt be blessed, because they 
cannot recompense thee; for thy recompence 
shall be in the resurrection of the just. 

13 But when one of those who reclined heard 
these (words), he said to him, Blessed he who 
shall eat bread in the kingdom of Aloha! 

'© Jeshu saith to him, A certain man made a 
great supper, and called many. 

And he sent his servant, at the time of the 
supper, to say to them who were called, Behold, 
every thing is prepared for you, come. 

18 And every one of them began to excuse 
himself. The first said to him, | have bought an 
estate, and am constrained to go forth to see it: | 
beseech thee, permit me to be excused. 

19 Another said, Five yoke of oxen have | 
bought, and | go to prove them: | beseech thee, 
permit me to be excused. 

2 Another said, A wife have | taken, and 
therefore | cannot come. 

?1 And the servant came and told his lord these 
things. Then the lord of the house was angry, 
and said to his servant, Go into the streets and 
outskirts of the city, and bring hither the poor, 
and the afflicted, and the lame, and the 
sightless. 

? And the servant said, My lord, itis done as 
thou hast commanded, and yet there is place. 
?3 And the lord said to his servant, Go forth into 
the ways, and among the hedges, and constrain 
them to come in, that my house may be filled: 
** for | tell you, that not one of those men who 
were called shall taste of my supper. 

?5 And while great multitudes were going with 
him, he turned and said to them, 
°° Whoever cometh with me, and doth not hate 
his father and his mother, and his brethren and 
his sisters, and his wife and his children, and 
himself also, a disciple he cannot be of mine. 

?7 And whoever doth not take up his cross and 
come after me, a disciple he cannot be of mine. 
?8 For who of you that willeth to build a tower, 
and doth not first sit down and reckon the 
expense of it, whether he have (wherewith) to 
finish it? 

*° lest, when he shall have laid the foundation, 
and shall not be able to finish, all who see shall 
deride him, 
°° saying, This man began to build, and was not 
able to finish. 

31 Or, what king, going to war with a king his 
neighbour, doth not first consider, whether he be 
able with ten thousand to meet him who cometh 
against him with twenty thousand? 


179 Luke 14:13 - Reception 


32 and if not, while he is distant from him, he 
may send legates, and pray for peace. 

33 So every one of you who doth not leave all 
his possession, cannot be unto me a disciple. 

3 Salt is good; but if the salt also shall become 
insipid, with what shall it be seasoned? 

°° Not for the earth, nor for the dunghill, it goeth. 
They cast it out. Who hath ears to hear, let him 
hear. 


15:1 Then drew near to him the publicans and 
sinners to hear him. 

* And the Sophree and Pharishee murmured, 
and said, This (man) receiveth sinners, and 
eateth with them. 

3 And Jeshu spake to them this parable: 

What man of you, who hath a hundred sheep, 
if he shall lose one from them, does not leave 
the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and, 
going, seeketh that which was lost until he shall 
have found it? 

° And when he hath found it, he rejoiceth and 
carrieth it upon his shoulders. 

And, coming to his house, he calleth his 

friends and his neighbours, and saith to them, 
Rejoice with me; for | have found the sheep 
which was lost. 
7 | say to you, that thus shall there be joy in 
heaven over one sinner who repenteth, more 
than over the ninety and nine just ones who 
have no need of repentance. 

8 Or, who is the woman that hath ten zuzis, and 
shall lose one of them, (and) does not light a 
lamp and sweep the house, and seek it 
diligently, until she shall have found it? 

? And when she hath found it, she calleth her 
friends and her neighbours, and saith to them, 
Rejoice with me; for | have found my zuzi that | 
had lost. 

| say to you, that so shall there be joy before 
the angels of God over one sinner that 
repenteth. 

1! And Jeshu said to them again, A certain man 
had two sons; 

and his minor'® son said to him, My father, 
give to me my division of the goods of thy 
house. And he divided to them his substance. 

13 And after a few days the minor son gathered 
together his all whatsoever, and went into a 
distant country, and there dispersed his 
substance in living profusely. 

14 And when every thing he had was finished, 
there was a great famine in that country; and he 
began to want. 


180 Luke 15:12 - Zuro, less 


15 And he went and joined himself to one of the 
sons of the city of that place; and he sent him 
into the field to tend the swine. 

16 And he had a desire to fill his belly with those 
karubs'®' which the swine did eat; and no man 
gave to him. 

And when he came to himself, he said, How 
many hirelings are there now in my father’s 
house, who have abundance of bread, and | 
here with hunger am perishing! 

18 | will arise, go to my father, and say to him, 
My father, | have sinned against heaven and 
before thee, 

19 and am no more worthy thy son to be called: 
make me as one of thy hirelings. 

2 And he arose, (and) went to his father. And 
while he was (yet) afar, his father saw him, and 
had compassion upon him, and ran, fell upon his 
neck, and kissed him. 

?1 And his son said to him, My father, | have 
sinned against heaven and before thee, and am 
not worthy thy son to be called. 

?? But his father said to his servants, Bring forth 
the first"? robe to clothe him, and put a ring 
upon his hand, and let him be, shod with 
sandals, 

?3 and bring, kill the calf that is fat, and let us eat 
and be glad; 

*4 for this my son was dead, and he is alive; he 
was lost, and is found. And they began to 
rejoice. 

? But he, the elder son, was in the field; and as 
he came and drew near to the house, he heard 
the voice of music; 

8 and he called one of the youths, and asked 
him what this was. 

?7 He said to him, Thy brother hath come, and 
thy father hath killed the calf that was fat, 
because he hath received him well. 

?8 And he was angry, and would not go in. And 
his father came forth and besought him. 

*° But he said to his father, Behold, how many 
years have | wrought thee service, and never 
have | transgressed thy commandment: yet 
never hast thou given me a kid, that | might feast 
with my friends. 
°° But this thy son, when he hath wasted thy 
substance with harlots, and hath come, thou 
hast killed for him the fatted calf. 


181 Luke 15:16 - Kurubee, the pods of the karub- 


tree, ceratonia siliqua 
182 Luke 15:22 - Or, principal 


31 His father saith to him, My son, thou in all 
time art with me, and every thing that | have is 
thine. 

32 But to rejoice it behoves us, and to be glad, 
because this thy brother was dead, and is alive; 
and was lost, and is found. 


16:1 And he spake a parable to his disciples: 
There was a certain rich man who had a house- 
chief;'® and he was accused to him that his 
substance he wasted. 

* And his lord called him, and said to him, What 
is this that | hear of thee? give me the account of 
thy house-headship; for thou canst no longer be 
house-chief unto me. 

3 And the house-chief said within himself, What 
shall | do? for my lord taketh from me the house- 
headship. | cannot dig, and to beg | am 
ashamed. 

“| know what I will do, that when | shall be put 
out of the house-headship, they may receive me 
into their houses. 

° And he called one by one from the debtors of 
his lord, and said to the first, How much owest 
thou to my lord? 

And he said to him, An hundred metres of oil. 
He saith to him, Take thy book, and sit down 
quickly, and write fifty metres. 

And he said to another, And thou, how much 
owest thou to my. lord? He saith to him, An 
hundred kureen'®* of wheat. He saith to him, 
Take thy book, and sit down, write eighty 
kureen. 

è And praised our Lord the house-chief who was 
unjust, in that he had done wisely; for the sons 
of this world are wiser than the sons of light in 
this their generation. 
? Also I say unto you, Make to you friends from 
this wealth of unrighteousness, that, when 
perfect, '® they may receive you into the 
tabernacles of eternity. '®° 

Whoever in the little is faithful, in the great 
also is faithful; and he who in the little is unjust, 
in the great also is unjust. 

If, therefore, in the wealth of unrighteousness 
you have not been faithful, the truth to you who 
will confide? 


183 Luke 16:1 - Rab-baitho 


Luke 16:7 - The Hebrew kor was about seventy- 
five gallons, five pints 

185 Luke 16:9a - “d’gamar,” “fulfilled” 

Luke 16:9b - “bamatlayhon d’lolam,” “worldly 
shelters” 


184 


186 


12 And if in that which is not yours you are not 
found faithful, your own who will give to you? 

13 No man can serve two lords; for either the 
one he will hate, and the other he will love; or 
the one he will honour, and the other despise. 
You cannot serve Aloha and wealth. 

14 But the Pharishee, when they heard all these 
things, because they loved money, derided him. 

13 But Jeshu said to them, You are they who 
justify yourselves before the sons of men; but 
Aloha knoweth your hearts. For, what is exalted 
among men, before Aloha is abominable. 

1€ The law and the prophets were until 
Juchanon; from thenceforth the kingdom of 
Aloha is preached, and every one presseth to 
enter. 

But it is easier for heaven and earth to pass 
away than one letter from the law to pass away. 

18 Every one who looseth his wife, and taketh 
another, committeth adultery; and every one 
who taketh the dismissed, committeth adultery. 

Now there was a certain rich man, and he 
was clothed in byssos '®” and purple, and every 
day feasted gaily. "° 

2 And there was a certain poor man, whose 
name was Loózar; and he lay at the gate of him 
who was rich, bruised with wounds, 

7" and desired to fill his belly with the crumbs 
which fell from the table of that rich. And also the 
dogs came and licked his wounds. 

” Now that poor man died, and angels 
conducted him to the bosom of Abraham: but 
that rich man also died, and was buried. 

?3 And, tormented in shiul, he lifted up his eyes 
afar, and seeth Abraham, and Loózar in his 
bosom. 

*4 And he cried with a high voice, and said, My 
father Abraham, have compassion upon me, 
and send Loózar, that he may dip the top of his 
finger in waters, and moisten my tongue; for, 
behold, | am tormented in this flame. 
®° Abraham said to him, My son, remember that 
thou didst receive thy goods in thy life, and 
Loózar his evils, and now, behold, he reposeth 
here, and thou art tormented. 

6 And with all these, there is a great void set 
between us and you, that they who would pass 
from hence unto you are not able, nor they also 
who would pass from thence to us. 


187 | uke 16:19a - Butso, Hebrew, buts; (2 Chron. v. 


12;) an 
Egyptian linen, extremely fine, soft, and white 
188 Luke 16:19b - Gaydith 


? He said to him, | pray thee, then, my father, to 
send him unto my father’s house: 

8 for five brethren have I; let him go and testify 
unto them, that they also come not to this place 
of torment. 

?9 Abraham said to him, They have Musha and 
the prophets, let them hear them. 

°° But he said to him, No, my father Abraham, 
but if one from the dead shall go unto them, they 
repent. 

31 Abraham saith to him, If Musha and the 
prophets they hear not, neither, if one from the 
dead should rise, would they believe him. 


17:1 And Jeshu said to his disciples, It cannot 
be that offences should not come, but woe to 
him by whom they shall come. 

* It were better for him that an ass-millstone 
were hanged on his neck, and he be cast into 
the sea. Woe (to him) who shall offend’® one of 
these little ones! 

Take heed to yourselves; if thy brother 
transgress, reprove him, and if he repent, forgive 
him. 

* And if seven times in the day he shall trespass 
against thee, and seven times in the day return 
to thee and say, | repent, forgive him. 

° And the apostles said unto our Lord, Increase 
to us faith. 

ê He saith to them, If you had faith as a grain of 
mustard, you should say to this mulberry tree, 
Be rooted up and planted in the sea, and it 
would obey you. 

7 Which of you, having a servant who leadeth a 
yoke (of oxen) or who tendeth the flock, and 
when he cometh from the field, saith to him at 
once, Pass on and recline thyself? 

ê but (rather) saith to him, Prepare me 
something that | may sup, and gird thy loins, 
serve me until | have eaten and drunk, and 
afterwards thou also shalt eat and drink. 

* Does that servant receive thanks because he 
hath done what was required of him? | consider 
not. 

1° Thus also you, when you have done all those 
things which are required of you, have said, We 
are unprofitable servants, because what we 
were obligated to do, (that) have we done. 

And it was that as Jeshu was going to 
Urishlem, he passed among the Shomroyee 
from Galila. 

12 And as he drew near to enter a certain 
village, there met him ten men, lepers, and they 
stood from afar, 


18 Luke 17:2 - Or, cause to stumble 


13 and lifted up their voice and said, Our Lord 
Jeshu, have mercy upon us! 

14 And when he saw them, he said to them, Go 
show yourselves to the priests. And as they 
went, they were cleansed. 

15 Then one of them, when he saw that he was 
cleansed, returned to him, and with a high voice 
glorified Aloha. 

'® And he fell upon his face before the feet of 
Jeshu, and thanked him. And, behold, this was a 
Shomroya. 

17 And Jeshu answered and said, Were not they 
who were cleansed ten? Where are the nine? 

18 None have separated to come (and) give 
praise to Aloha, but this, who is from a strange 
people. 

19 And he said to him, Arise, go; thy faith hath 
saved thee. 
°° And when Jeshu was questioned from the 
Pharishee, When cometh the kingdom of Aloha? 
he answered and said to them, The kingdom of 
Aloha cometh not with watchings: 

1 hor say they, Behold, it is here! and, Behold, 
it is there! for the kingdom of Aloha is within you. 
?? And he said to his disciples, The days will 
come, when you will desire to see one of the 
days of the Son of man, and you will not see. 

?3 And if they say to you, Behold here, and, 
Behold there, go not. 

?4 For as the lightning lighteneth from heaven, 
and illuminateth all beneath the heaven, so shall 
be the Son of man in his day. 

?5 But first it will be that he shall suffer many 
(things), and be rejected of this generation. 

8 And as it was in the days of Nuch, so will it be 
in the days of the Son of man; 

*7 when they ate and drank and took wives and 
gave to husbands, until the day when Nuch 
entered into the ark, and the deluge came, and 
destroyed every one. 

?8 So also as it was in the days of Lut; they ate 
and drank, and bought and sold, and planted 
and builded; 

*° but in the day that Lut went forth from Sadum, 
the Lorp rained fire and brimstone from heaven 
and destroyed them all. 

Thus will it be in the day when the Son of 
man shall be revealed. 

31 In that day, he who is on the roof and his 
garments in the house, let him not go down and 
take them. And he who is in the field, let him not 
turn his back. 

32 Remember the wife of Lut. 

33 Whoever willeth to save his life shall lose it, 
and whoever is willing to lose his life shall save 
it. 


34 | tell you, that in that night two shall be in one 
bed; the one shall be taken and the other left. 

°° Two shall be grinding together, one shall be 
taken and the other left. 

°° Two shall be in the field, one shall be taken 
and the other left. 

37 They answered and said to him, Where, our 
Lord? He saith to them, Where the body is, there 
will be assembled the eagles. 


18:1 And he spake also a parable to them, that 
in all time (men) should pray and not weary. 

? There was a judge in a certain city who of 
Aloha was not afraid, and of men was not 
regardful. 

° But a certain widow was in that city, who came 
to him, saying, Avenge me of my adversary. 

And he was not willing long time; but afterward 
he said within himself, If of Aloha | am not afraid, 
and of men am not regardful, 

° yet, because this widow wearies me, | will 
avenge her, that in all time she come not 
molesting me. 

ê And our Lord said, Hear what saith the 
unrighteous judge. 

But shall not Aloha do vengeance for his 
chosen, who cry to him by day and by night, and 
prolong his spirit towards ‘°° them? 

ê | tell you he will avenge them speedily. 
Nevertheless, when the Son of man shall come, 
will he find faith upon the earth? 

? And he spake this parable against some who 
trusted in themselves that they were just, and 
despised all (men): 

10 Two men went up to the temple to pray, the 
one a Pharisha, the other a publican; 

" and, behold, the Pharisha stood (and) within 
himself these words prayed: Aloha, | thank thee 
that | am not as the rest of men, rapacious and 
unjust, and adulterers; nor as this publican. 

But | fast twice in the week, and tithe 
whatever | possess. 

° But that publican stood from afar, and would 
not even his eyes lift up to heaven, but smote 
upon his breast, saying, Aloha, be merciful to 
me a sinner! 

14 | tell you that this one went down justified to 
his house, rather than that Pharisha. For every 
man who exalteth himself shall be humbled, and 
every one who humbleth himself shall be 
exalted. 

15 Then they brought to him infants, that he 
should touch them: and the disciples saw it, and 
rebuked them. 


Luke 18:7 - Or, upon them 


1ê But Jeshu called them, and said to them, 
Suffer children to come to me, and forbid them 
not; for of those who are as these, of them is the 
kingdom of heaven. 

Amen | say to you, That whoever does not 
receive the kingdom of Aloha as a child, shall 
not enter into it. 

18 And one of the rulers asked him, saying, 
Good Teacher, what shall | do that | may inherit 
eternal life? 

19 Jeshu saith to him, Why callest thou me 
good, and none is good but one, Aloha? 

The commandments thou knowest, Thou 
shalt not kill, and, Thou shalt not commit 
adultery, and, Thou shalt not steal, and, Thou 
shalt not witness false testimony, Honour thy 
father and thy mother. 

?1 He saith to him, These all have | kept from 
my childhood. 

But when Jeshu heard this, he said to him, 
One thing is lacking with thee; go, sell whatever 
thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt 
have treasure in heaven, and come after me. 

?3 But he, when he heard these words, was 
grieved; for he was very rich. 

And when Jeshu saw that he was grieved, he 
said, How difficult is it to those who have riches 
to enter into the kingdom of Aloha! 

5 it is easier for a camel'”" into the aperture of 
a needle to enter, than the rich into the kingdom 
of Aloha. 

°° They who heard said to him, And who can be 
saved? 

? But Jeshu said, Those (things) which with the 
sons of men are not possible, with Aloha are 
possible to be done. 

8 Shemun Kipha said to him, Behold, we have 
forsaken every thing, and have come after thee. 
*° Jeshu saith to him, Amen | say to you, That 
no man who leaveth houses, or fathers, or 
brethren, or wife, or children, for the kingdom of 
Aloha, 

°° and shall not receive by two-fold (as) many in 
this time, and in the world that cometh the life 
that is eternal. 

And Jeshu took the twelve, and said to them, 
Behold, we go up to Urishlem, and shall be 
fulfilled all (things) that are written in the 
prophets concerning the Son of man. 

For he will be delivered to the Gentiles; and 
they will deride him, and spit in his face, 

33 and will scourge him, and maltreat him, and 
kill him; and the third day he shall arise. 


191 Luke 18:25 - gamla, or “a great beam that 


supports the rafters” 


%4 But not one of these understood they: for this 
word'® was hidden from them, and they knew 
not those sayings which were spoken with them. 
°° And as he drew nigh to Jirichu, a certain blind 
man was sitting by the road-side, ‘°° and 
begging. 

°° And he heard the voice of the multitude as it 
was passing, and asked what was this. 

5’ They say to him, Jeshu Natsroya passeth. 

38 And he cried and said, Jeshu bar David, have 
mercy on me! 

3° And they who went before Jeshu rebuked 
him, that he might be silent: but he cried out the 
more, Son of David, have mercy on me! 

And Jeshu stood, and commanded that they 
should lead him unto him. And when he, 
approached him, he asked him 

"and said to him, What wilt thou | shall do for 
thee? And he said, My Lord, that | may see. 
“? And Jeshu said to him, See! thy faith hath 
saved thee. 

And in an instant he saw, and came after him, 
and glorified Aloha: and all the people, when 
they saw, gave praise to Aloha. 


19:1 And as Jeshu entered and passed through 
Jirichu, 

* there was a certain man whose name was 
Zakai; he was rich and chief of the publicans:'™ 
3 and he wished’ to see Jeshu, who he was, 
and could not for the crowd, because in his 
stature Zakai was small. 

“ And he ran before Jeshu, and ascended a wild 
fig-tree'’ to see him, because so he was about 
to pass. 

° And when Jeshu came to that place, he saw 
him, and said to him, Be in haste, descend, 
Zakai; for to-day | must be at thy house. 

ê And he was in haste, and descended, and 
received him rejoicing. 

7 But when they all saw (this), they murmured, 
and said that with a man a sinner he hath gone 
in to abide. 

ê But Zakai stood, and said to Jeshu, Behold, 
my Lord, the dividing” of my wealth give I to 
the poor; and to every man, whatever | have 
wrongfully taken, fourfold | restore. 


192 Luke 18:34 - Or, doctrine 


Luke 18:35 - Hand of the way 
Luke 19:2 - Rab Mokasee 

Luke 19:3 - Willed 

Luke 19:4 - Titha phakihta, the 
ficus silvestris 

197 Luke 19:8 — pelgot, “half” 


193 
194 
195 
196 


? Jeshu saith to him, To-day is there salvation to 
this house, because this (man) also (is a) son of 
Abraham. 

10 For the Son of man came to save that which 
was lost. 

11 And when they had heard these things, he 
added to speak a parable; because he had 
drawn nigh to Urishlem, and they expected that 
in that hour would be revealed the kingdom of 
Aloha. 

12 And he said, A certain man of a noble 
house'®® went into a distant country, to receive 
for himself a kingdom, and to return. 

13 And he called his ten servants, and gave to 
them ten minin,'”’ and said to them, Trade till | 
come. 

14 But his citizens hated him, and sent 
messengers after him, saying, We are not willing 
that this should reign over us. 

And having received the kingdom and 
returned, he spake to call to him those servants 
to whom he had given the silver, that he might 
know how every one of them had traded. 

18 And the first came and said, My lord, thy mani 
ten minin hath gained. 

17 He saith to him, Well, good servant: because 
in a little thou art found faithful, thou shalt have 
rule over ten towns. 

18 And the second came and said, My lord, thy 
mani five minin hath made. 

19 He saith also to this, Thou also shalt have 
rule over five towns. 

2 And the other came and said, My lord, behold 
thy mani which | have had with me, laid up ina 
napkin. 

?1 For | feared thee, because thou art a hard 
man, taking up what thou hadst not laid down, 
and reaping what thou sowedst not. 

*? He said to him, From thy own mouth | will 
judge thee, evil servant: thou didst know that | 
was a hard man, taking up what | had not laid 
down, and reaping what | sowed not: 

?3 why (then) gavest thou not my silver upon the 
table, that when | came | might require it with its 
increase? 

*4 And to those who stood before him he said, 
Take from him the mani, and give to him who 
hath the ten minin. 

They say to him, Our lord, he hath ten minin. 


198 | uke 19:12 - Bar tuhma raba, “A son of a great 


family” 

199 | uke 19:13 - The mani (Heb. maneh) is said to 
have been equal to sixty shekels, or nine pounds 
English 


*® He saith to them, | tell you, that to every one 
who hath (it) shall be given; and from him who 
hath not, that also which he hath shall be taken. 
*’ But those adversaries who would not that | 
should reign over them, bring them, and slay 
them before me. 
28 And when Jeshu had said these things, he 
went forward to go to Urishlem. 
2° And when he came to Bethphage and Beth- 
ania, at the mount that is called the Place of 
Olives, he sent two from his disciples, 
3 and said to them, Go to the village over 
against us; and as you enter, behold, you will 
find a colt tied, whereon no man hath ridden: 
loose and bring him. 
31 And if any man demand why you loose him, 
thus say: It is requested by our Lord. 
32 And they who were sent went and found as 
he had told them. 

And as they were loosing the colt, the owners 
of him said to them, Why loose you the colt? 
34 And they said to them, Because by our Lord it 
is requested. 

° And they brought him to Jeshu; and they cast 
upon the colt their garments, and Jeshu rode 
upon him. 

ê And as they went, they spread their clothes in 
the way. 

37 And when he had come nigh to the declivity 
of the Mount of Olives, the whole assembly of 
the disciples began to rejoice, and praise Aloha 
with a high voice, for all the mighty acts which 
they had seen: 

38 and they said, Blessed be the King who 
cometh in the name of the Lorb! Peace in the 
heavens, and glory in the highest! 

39 But some of the Pharishee from among the 
multitudes say to him, Rabi, rebuke thy 
disciples. 

“° He saith to them, | tell you, if these should be 
silent, the stones would cry out. 

" And when he approached, and saw the city, 
he wept over her, 

saying, If thou hadst known these things 
which are for thy peace, and in this thy day! But 
now they are hidden from thine eyes. 
“8 But the days will come to thee when thine 
enemies shall encompass thee and straiten thee 
on every side, 
“* and they shall overthrow thee, and thy 
children within thee, and not leave in thee one 
stone upon another,” because thou knewest 
not the time of thy visitation. 


20 | uke 19:44 - A stone upon stone 


45 And as he went into the temple, he began to 
cast out those who bought in it and sold, 

“6 and said to them, It is written that my house is 
the house of prayer; but you have made it a den 
of thieves. 

“7 And he taught every day in the temple; but 
the chief priests and the scribes and the elders 
of the people sought to destroy him, 

“8 but could not find what they might do to him; 
for all the people hung upon him to hear him. 


20:1 And it was on one of the days, while he 
taught the people in the temple and evangelized, 
the chief priests and scribes with the elders rose 
up against him, 

? and said to him, Tell us by what authority thou 
doest these, and who is he who gave thee this 
authority? 

3 Jeshu answered and said to them, I will also 
ask of you a word, and tell you me: 

“the baptism of Juchanon, from heaven was it, 
or from the sons of men? 

° But they reasoned within themselves, saying, 
If we shall say, From heaven, he saith to us, 
Why did you not believe him? 

ê But if we shall say, From men, all the people 
will stone us; for they are persuaded that 
Juchanon was a prophet. 

7 And they said to him, We know not from 
whence it is. 

8 Jeshu saith to them, Nor tell | you by what 
authority | do these. 

* And he began to speak to the people this 
parable: A certain man planted a vinery, and let 
it to husbandmen, and removed for a great time. 

10 And at the season he sent his servant to the 
husbandmen that they should give him of the 
fruit of the vinery. But the husbandmen beat him, 
and sent him away empty. 

" And he added and sent another servant; but 
they beat him also, and maltreated him, and 
sent him away empty. 

12 And he added and sent a third; but they also 
wounded him, and cast him out. 

13 The lord of the vinery saith, What shall | do? | 
will send my son, the beloved; now will they see 
him and reverence him. 

14 But when the husbandmen saw him, they 
reasoned among themselves, saying, This is the 
heir: come, let us kill him, and the inheritance 
will be ours. 

15 And they cast him out of the vinery, and killed 
him. What therefore shall the lord of the vinery 
do to them? 


1€ He will come and destroy those husbandmen, 
and will give the vinery to others. But when they 
heard, they said, May this not be! 

’ But he beheld them, and said, And what is 
that which is written, The stone which the 
builders rejected is become the head of the 
corner?” 

18 And every one who shall fall upon this stone 
shall be broken; and every one on whom it shall 
fall it will scatter him. 

19 But the chief priests and Sophree sought to 
lay hands on him in that very hour; but they 
feared the people, for they knew that concerning 
them(selves) he had spoken this parable. 

20 And they sent to him spies, who should 
resemble just men, that they might take him in 
discourse, and deliver him to the judgment and 
to the authority of the governor. 

21 And they asked him, and said to him, Doctor, 
we know that thou speakest and teachest rightly, 
neither dost thou deceive,” but with integrity 
thou teachest the way of Aloha. 

Is it lawful for us to give head-silver to Cesar 
or not? 

?3 But he understood their subtilty, and said, 
Why tempt you me? 

24 Show me a dinara. Of whom upon it is the 
image and the inscription? But they said, Of 
Cesar. 

*° Jeshu saith to them, Give then of Cesar’s to 
Cesar, and of Aloha’s unto Aloha. 

*° And they could not take hold of his words 
before the people; and they wondered at his 
answer, and were silent. 

? But some of the Zadukoyee approached, they 
who say that there is no resurrection; and they 
questioned him, 

and said to him, Doctor, Musha wrote to us 
that if a man’s brother die having a wife who 
hath not children, his brother shall take his wife, 
and raise up seed unto his brother. 

*° But there were seven brethren; and the first 
took; a wife, and died without children. 

And the second took his wife, and he died 
without children. 

31 And the third also took her; and so also the 
seven of them: and they died and left no 
children. 

32 Died in the end also the woman. 

33 In the resurrection therefore, whose of them 
shall she be the wife? for the seven of them had 
taken her. 


21 Luke 20:17 - The head corner of the angle 


202 | uke 20:21 - Thou art not an assumer of faces 


34 Jeshu saith to them, The sons of this world 
take wives, and women become (the wives) of 
men: 
35 but they who of that world are worthy, and of 
the resurrection which is from among the dead, 
take not wives, neither do women become (the 
wives) of men. 
3° Neither again can they die, for they are as the 
angels; and the children are they of Aloha, 
because they have become the children of the 
resurrection. 
3” But that the dead arise, Musha also showeth; 
for he commemorateth at the bush, while he 
saith, The Lorp the God of Abraham, and the 
God of Ishok, and the God of Jakub. 
°° But he was not the God of the dead, but of 
the living: for they all live unto him. 
°° And some of the Sophree answered and said 
to him, Doctor, thou hast well said. 

And they dared not question him again of any 
thing. 
“ And he said to them, How say the Sophree 
concerning the Meshicha, that he is the Son of 
David? 
42 And David himself saith in the book of 
Psalms, The Lord” said unto my Lord, Sit thou 
at my right hand, 
“3 until | put thine adversaries beneath thy feet. 
44 lf David therefore calleth him Lord, how is he 
his son? 
4 And while all the people heard, he said to his 
disciples, 
“© Beware of the Sophree, who will to walk in 
stoles, and love the shaloma in public places, 
and the chief seats in the synagogues, and the 
chief reclining-places at evening feasts; 
47 who devour the houses of widows, and for 
the occasion prolong their prayers: these shall 
receive the greater judgment. 


21:1 Jeshu looked at those rich (persons) who 
were throwing into the house of treasure their 
oblations. 

And he saw also a certain poor widow who 
threw in two shomonee. 
3 And he said, Truth | say to you, That this poor 
widow hath thrown in more than every one: 
4 for all those from what abounded to them have 
thrown into the house of the oblation of Aloha: 
but this from her penury all that she possessed 
hath she thrown in. 


203 | uke 20:42 — Mor-Yah, “The LORD,” equivalent to 


YHWH 


° And as some spake of the temple, (with) what 
beautiful stones and gifts it was adorned, Jeshu 
said to them, 

ê These that you see, the days shall come 
(when) of them there will not be found a stone 
upon a stone that shall not be destroyed. 

And they inquired of him, and said, Malphona, 
when shall these be? and what is the sign that 
these are nigh to be? 

ê But he said to them, Beware lest you be 
seduced: for many will come in my name, and 
will say, | am the Meshicha; and the time hath 
drawn nigh: but go not you after them. 

? And when you hear of wars and commotions, 
fear not: for these are first to be; but not yet 
cometh the end. 

° For nation shall rise up against nation, and 
kingdom against kingdom: 

" and great earthquakes will be in divers 
places, and famines, and plagues; and there will 
be portents, and terrors, and great signs from 
the heavens will appear, and great tempests 
shall there be. 

1? But before all these, they will lay hands upon 
you, and persecute you, and deliver you up to 
the synagogues, and to the house of the bound. 
And they will bring you before kings and 
governors on account of my name. 

'S And it shall be to you for a testimony.” 

14 But lay it up in your hearts that you may not 
be learned for the answer; 

15 for | will give you a mouth and wisdom which 
all your adversaries cannot stand against. 

"© But your fathers, and your brethren, and your 
kinsfolk, and your friends will betray you, and 
some of you they shall put to death. 

17 And you will be hated of all men on account 
of my name: 

S yet a hair of your head shall not perish, 

* but in your perseverance you shall possess 
your souls. 

20 But when you see Urishlem encompassed by 
an army, then know that its destruction hath 
drawn nigh. 

2’ Then let them who are in Jihud escape to the 
mountain, and they who are within her escape, 
and let not them who are in the country places 
enter into her. 

For those (will be) the days of retribution, that 
all which is written may be fulfilled. 

?3 But woe to those who are with child and to 
those who suckle in those days! for there will be 
great distress in the land, and wrath upon this 
people. 


204 Luke 21:13 - A martyrdom 


4 And they shall fall by the edge” of the 
sword, and be led captive into every place, and 
Urishlem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, 
until shall be fulfilled the times of the Gentiles. 
*° And there will be signs in the sun, and in the 
moon, and in the stars, and on earth distress of 
nations, and smiting of hands from astonishment 
at the voice of the sea, 
*6 the commotion hurrying forth the souls of the 
sons of men from fear of what is about to come 
upon the earth; and the powers of the heavens 
shall be commoved. 
?7 And then shall they see the Son of man 
coming in the clouds, with power and great 
lory. 

2 But when these things begin to be, take 
courage,” and lift up your heads, because your 
redemption hath drawn nigh. 
*° And he spake to them a parable, Behold the 
fig-tree and all the trees; 
°° when they bud forth, immediately from them 
you know that summer hath drawn nigh. 

Thus also you, when you see that these are, 
know that nigh is the kingdom of Aloha. 

Amen | say to you, That this race shall not 
pass away till all these things shall be. 

Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my 
words shall not pass away. 
34 But take heed to yourselves, that at any time 
your hearts be not heavy with excess and 
drunkenness, and the care of the world, and 
unawares shall come upon you that day. 
3 For as a net it will overtake all them who 
dwell upon the faces of the whole earth. 
°° Be therefore wakeful at all time, and pray that 
you may be worthy to escape from those things 
that are about to be, and that you may stand 
before the Son of man. 
37 So in the day (time) he taught in the temple, 
and at night he went forth and lodged in the 
mount which is called the Place of Olives. 
38 And all the people were early with him at the 
temple to hear his word. 


22:1 But the feast of the Phatiree, which is 
called Petscha, drew on. 

? And the chief priests and the Sophree sought 
how they might kill him; for they feared from the 
people. 

° But Satana entered into Jihuda called 
Scarjuta, who was of the number of the twelve. 


20 Luke 21:24 - Mouth 


7 Luke 21:28 - Ethlabbu, take heart 


“ And he went, and spoke with the chief priests, 
and the Sophree, and the chief authorities of the 
temple, how he would deliver him to them. 

° And they were glad, and confirmed to give him 
silver. 

ê And he promised to them, and sought him 
opportunity to betray him apart from the 
multitude. 

7 And the day of unleavened bread came, on 
which it was the custom to slay the petscha. 

è And Jeshu sent Kipha and Juchanon, and said 
to them, Go prepare for us the petscha,””” that 
we may eat. 

? But they said to him, Where wilt thou that we 
prepare? 

1° He saith to them, When, you have entered 
into the city, a man meeteth you, bearing a 
pitcher of waters; go after him, 

" and when he hath gone in, say to the lord of 
the house, Our Master saith, Is there a dining- 
place where | may eat the petscha with my 
disciples? 

12 And he will show you a certain large upper 
chamber which is furnished: there make ready. 

13 And they went, and found as he had told 
them: and they prepared the petscha. 

14 And when it was time, Jeshu came and 
reclined, and the twelve apostles with him. 

15 And he said to them, With desire have | 
desired to eat this petscha with you before | 
suffer: 

16 for | tell you that from henceforth | shall not 
eat it, until it shall have been fulfilled in the 
kingdom of Aloha. 

17 And he took the cup, and praised, and said, 
Take this, and divide it among yourselves: 

18 for | tell you that | shall not drink of the fruit of 
the vine, until the kingdom of Aloha shall have 
come. 

19 And he took bread, and praised, and brake, 
and gave to them, and said, This is my body 
which for you is given: this do in my memory.” 
20 And thus also respecting the cup, when, after 
they had supped, he said, This cup is the new 
covenant in my blood, which for you is shed. 

21 Nevertheless, the hand of him who betrayeth 
me is on the table. 


8 


207 Luke 22:7 - Petscha = Heb. Pasach, "the paschal 


lamb" 

208 Luke 22:19 - Hono phagri d'all aphaikun 
methyiheb, hode' vaithun obdin ledukroni 

20 Luke 22:20 - Hono coso d'diathiki chadatho 
b'demi dachlophaikun metheshed 


2 And the Son of man goeth, as he was set 
apart:*'° nevertheless woe to that man by whom 
he is betrayed! 

?3 And they began to inquire among 
themselves, who it was of them who this should 
do. 

?4 But there was also a contention among them, 
who of them was the greatest. 

?5 And Jeshu said to them, The kings of the 
Gentiles are their lords; and they who exercise 
authority over them, doers of good are called. 

? But you, not so: yea, he who is great among 
you, let him be as the least; and he who is chief, 
as one who serveth. 

*’ For who is greatest, he who reclineth, or he 
who serveth? Is not he who reclineth? But | am 
among you as he who serveth. 

?8 You are they who have remained with me in 
my temptations. 

3I And | promise to you, as hath promised to me 
my Father, a kingdom; 

°° that you may eat and drink at the table in my 
kingdom, and may sit upon thrones, and judge 
the twelve tribes of Isroel. 

31 And Jeshu said to Shemun, Shemun, behold, 
Satana, demandeth to sift thee as wheat; 

* but | have prayed for thee, that thy faith may 
not fail: and thou also, in the time that thou art 
converted, confirm thy brethren. 

33 But Shemun said to him, My Lord, with thee | 
am prepared, and for the house of the bound, 
and for death. 

34 Jeshu saith to him, | tell thee, Shemun, that 
the cock will not crow to-day, till three times thou 
hast denied that thou knowest me. 

°° And he said to them, When | sent you without 
purse, or scrip, or shoes, was any thing wanting 
to you? They say to him, Nothing. 

°° He saith to them, Henceforth, he who hath a 
purse, let him take it, and likewise a scrip also; 
and he who hath not a sword, let him sell his 
garment and buy a sword. 

For | tell you also, that what is written must be 
fulfilled in me, that with the transgressors he was 
numbered: for all which concerns me must be 
accomplished. 

38 And they say to him, Our Lord, behold, here 
are two swords. He saith to them, They suffice. 

And he came forth, and went, as he was 
used, to the mount of the Place of Olives; and 
his disciples also went after him. 

“° And when come unto the spot, he said to 
them, Pray that you enter not into temptation. 


21 Luke 22:22 - Or, separated 


“" And he removed from them as (about the 
distance of) a stone’s throw, and bowed the 
knee, and prayed, 

* and said, Father, if thou wilt, let this cup pass: 
nevertheless not my will, but thine be done. 

^3 And an angel appeared to him from heaven, 
who strengthened him. 

4 And being in terror, more vehemently he 
prayed, and his sweat was as drops of blood, 
and fell upon the ground. 

45 And he arose from prayer, and came to his 
disciples, and found them asleep, from sorrow. 
ê And he said to them, Why sleep you? arise 

and pray, that you enter not into temptation. 

47 And as he was speaking, behold a multitude, 
and behold him who was called Jihuda, one of 
the twelve, coming before them, and he came 
nigh to Jeshu, and kissed him: for this was the 
sign he had given to them, He whom | shall kiss 
is he. 

“8 Jeshu saith to him, Jihuda, with the kiss 
betrayest thou the Son of man? 

But when they who were with him saw what 
was done, they say to him, Our Lord, shall we 
strike with the sword? 
°° And one of them struck the servant of the 
high priest, and took off his right ear. 
5t Jeshu answered and said, It sufficeth until 
this; and he touched his ear which he had 
struck, and healed it. 

82 And Jeshu said to them who had come 
against him, the chief priests, and elders, and 
the chiefs of the forces of the temple, As against 
a thief are you come forth against me, with 
swords and clubs to take me? 

°° Every day with you have I been in the temple, 
and you did not stretch forth upon me (your) 
hands; but this is your hour and the power of 
darkness. 

54 And they took (and) brought him to the house 
of the chief of the priests; and Shemun came 
after him from afar. 

°° Now they had kindled a fire in the midst of the 
hall, and were sitting around it, and Shemun 
also sat with them. 

And a certain damsel saw him as he sat by 
the fire, and, looking at him, she said, This also 
was with him. 
°” But he denied, and said, Woman, | know him 
not. 
°8 And after a little while, another saw him, and 
said, Thou also art of them. But Kipha said, | am 
not. 


=" Luke 22:48 - Jihuda, b'nushektho mashlem ath 


labareh denosho? 


°° And after one hour another contended and 
said, Assuredly this also was with him, for he is 
also a Galiloya. 

ê Kipha saith, Man, | know not what thou 
sayest. And at once, while he was speaking, the 
cock crew. 

ê1 And Jeshu turned, and looked upon Kipha; 
and Shemun remembered his word which our 
Lord had spoken to him, that before the cock 
shall crow thou wilt have denied me three times. 
ê And Shemun went without and wept bitterly. 
63 And the men who held Jeshu mocked him, 
and veiled him, 

êt and they struck him upon the face, saying, 
Prophesy, who struck thee. 

® And many other things they blasphemed and 
spake against him. 

ê And when it dawned, the elders and chief 
priests and the Sophree came together, and 
took him into the house of their assembly; 

ê saying to him, Art thou the Meshicha? tell us. 
He saith to them, Should I tell you, you would 
not believe me; 

and were | to ask you, you would not return 
me a word, nor release me. 
© Henceforth the Son of man sitteth at the right 
hand of the power of Aloha. 
70 Then said they all, Thou art, then, the Son of 
Aloha? Jeshu saith to them, You say that | am. 
” They say, Why yet need we witnesses? for 
we have heard from his mouth. 


23:1 And the whole assembly of them arose, 
and brought him to Pilatos. 
? And they began to accuse him, saying, We 
have found this who deludeth our people, and 
forbiddeth that tribute"? unto Caesar we should 
give, saying of himself that he is the King 
Meshicha. 
? But Pilatos asked him, and said to him, Art 
thou the king of the Jinudoyee? He saith to him, 
Thou hast said. 

And Pilatos said to the chief priests and to the 
assembly, | find no occasion against this man. 
° But they cried out and said, He commoveth 
our people while he teacheth throughout all 
Jihud, beginning from Galila unto this place. 
ê Pilatos, however, when he heard the name of 
Galila, asked if the man were a Galiloya. 
7 And when he knew that he was from the limit 
of the jurisdiction of Herodes, he sent him unto 
Herodes, because that in Urishlem he was in 
those days. 


21? Luke 23:2 - Or, heaa-silver 


è And Herodes, when he saw Jeshu, was very 
glad; for he had desired to see him of a great 
time: for he had heard concerning him many 
things, and hoped that some sign he should see 
from him. 

? And many words he asked him; but Jeshu 
gave him no answer whatever. 

10 And the chief priests and scribes stood and 
strenuously accused him. 

" Then Herodes and his soldiers treated him as 
a fool;*'? and when he had derided him, he 
dressed him in a robe of crimson, and sent him 
to Pilatos. 

And in that day Pilatos and Herodes were 
friends with each other; for before there had 
been enmity between them. 

3 And Pilatos called the chief priests and the 
rulers of the people, 

and said to them, You have brought to me 
this man as a perverter of your people; and, 
behold, | have examined him in your sight, and 
have found no cause in this man of all that you 
accuse him: 

nor also Herodes; for | sent him unto him, 
and, behold, nothing worthy of death is done to 
him: 

16 | will therefore chastise 
him. 

17 For a custom had he to release to them one 
at the festival. 

18 But all the multitude cried out, saying, Take 
this, and release to us Baraba; 

19 he who, for insurrection and murder which 
had been done in the city, had been thrown into 
the house of the chained. 

20 But Pilatos spake with them again, being 
willing to release Jeshu. 
=" But they cried out, saying, Crucify him! 
Crucify him! 

22 He the third time also said to them, Why, 
what evil hath this done? Cause whatever that is 
worthy of death, | find not in him: | will therefore 
chastise him, and dismiss him. 

But they were urgent with a high voice, 
demanding that they might crucify him; and 
theirs and the voices of the high priests 
prevailed. 

24 And Pilatos commanded that their 
requirement should be done. 

*° And he released to them him who, for 
insurrection and murder, had been thrown into 
the house of the chained, whom they had asked: 
but Jeshu he delivered to their will. 


214 him, and dismiss 


*13 Luke 23:11 - Shoteh hu 


214 Luke 23:16 - Or, admonish 


?8 And as they led him away, they laid hold on 
Shemun Kurinoya, who was coming from the 
country, and they laid on him the cross, that he 
might bear (it) after Jeshu. 

?7 And there followed him much people, and 
those women who mourned and wailed for him. 
?8 And Jeshu turned to them, and said, 
Daughters of Urishlem, weep not for me, but for 
yourselves weep, and for your children. 

*° For, behold, coming are the days in which 
they shall say, Blessed are the barren, and the 
wombs which have not borne, and the breasts 
that have not suckled. 

°° Then shall they begin to say to the 
mountains, Fall on us! and to the heights, Cover 
us! 

31 For if to the tree which is good?"® they do 
these things, unto the dry what shall be? 

32 And there went with him two others, workers 
of evil, to be put to death. 

° And when they came to a certain place called 
Karkaphtha,”"® there they crucified him, and 
those workers of evil, one on his right hand, and 
one on his left. 

** But Jeshu himself said, Father, forgive them; 
for they know not what they do.” And they 
divided his garments, and cast for them lots. 

°° But the people stood beholding, and the 
rulers also, mocking him, and saying, He saved 
others, let him save himself, if he be the 
Meshicha, the Chosen of God. 

38 And the soldiers also, deriding him, 
approaching him, and offering to him vinegar, 

37 said to him, If thou art the King of the 
Jihudoyee, save thyself. 

38 And there was also an inscription which was 
written over him in Greek and Roman and 
Hebrew," THIS IS THE KING OF THE 
JIHUDOYEE. 

°° And one of those workers of evil who were 
hanged with him, blasphemed against him, 
saying, If thou art the Meshicha, deliver thyself, 
and deliver us also. 

And his companion rebuked him, and said to 
him, Dost thou not fear (even) Aloha? for thou 
also art in this judgment. 

And we righteously, forasmuch as we have 
been deserving, and as we are punished for that 


** Luke 23:31 - Or, prepared 


Luke 23:33 - The Skull 

Luke 23:34 - Aba shebuk lehun, lo 

gir yodin mono obdin 

718 Luke 23:38 - Javanoith, Rumoith, Ebroith 


216 
217 


which we have done; but this hath done nothing 
that is abominable. 

“? And he said to Jeshu, Remember me, my 
Lord, when thou art come into thy kingdom! 

“8 Jeshu saith to him, Amen | say to thee, That 
to-day with me thou shalt be in Paradise.*"? 

“* Now it was about six hours, and there was 
darkness over all the earth until nine hours. 

4 And the sun darkened, and rent was the vail 
of the temple through the midst of it. 

“6 And Jeshu cried with a high voice, and said, 
My Father, in thy hands | place my spirit.” This 
he said, and completed. 

“” But when the centurion saw what was done, 
he glorified Aloha, saying, Assuredly this was a 
just man. 

“8 And all the multitude, they who were 
assembled to see this, when they saw what was 
done, returned, smiting upon their breasts. 

And there were standing afar off all the 
acquaintances of Jeshu, and those women who 
came with him from Galila; and they saw these 
things. 
°° But a certain man, whose name was 
Jauseph, a senator from Rometha, a city of 
Jehud, a man (who) was good and just: 

51 (this had not consented to the counsel and 
deed of them; and he was waiting for the 
kingdom of Aloha:) 

52 this approached Pilatos, and begged the 
body of Jeshu; 

53 and he took it down, and wrapped it in a cloth 
of linen, and laid it in a hewn sepulchre, in which 
no one had hitherto been laid. 

54 And it was the day of the preparation; and the 
shabath had lighted. 

°° And the women also drew near, they who had 
come with him from Galila; and they saw the 
sepulchre, and where the body was laid; 

°° and, returned, they prepared balsams and 
aromatics, and on the shabath rested, as it is 
commanded. 


24:1 But on the first (day) in the week, in the 
morning, while yet dark, they came to the 
sepulchre, and brought those aromatics which 
they had prepared; and with them there were 
other women. 

* And they found the stone rolled from the 
sepulchre, and entered, 

° but found not the body of Jeshu. 


*19 | uke 23:43 - Amin omar-no lok, d'yaumono ami 


tehve be-paradiso 
729 | uke 23:46 - Abi, b'idaik soém-no ruchi 


* And it was that while they were amazed at 
this, behold, two men stood over against them, 
and whose raiment shined; 

° and they were in fear, and bowed their faces 
to the earth. And they said to them, Why are you 
seeking the living with the dead? 

ê He is not here, he is risen. Remember what he 
spake with you while he was in Galila, 

and (when he) said, The Son of man must be 
delivered into the hands of men of sins, and he 
will be crucified, and (in) the third of the days he 
will arise. 

è And they remembered his words, 

? and returned from the sepulchre, and told all 
these (things) unto the eleven, and to the rest. 

10 Now it was Mariam Magdalitha, Juchanon, 
and Mariam his mother, and Jacub, and the rest 
who were with them, who told these 
(occurrences) to the apostles. 

And these words appeared in their eyes as 
dreams, and they believed them not. 

But Shemun arose, and ran to the sepulchre, 
and, looking in, he saw the linen clothes lying 
apart; and he went away, wondering in himself 
at what was done. 

13 And, behold, two of them in that day went to a 
village whose name was Emaos, and distant 
from Urishlem sixty stadia. 

14 And they talked one with the other of all these 
(events) which had happened. 

15 And while they discoursed and investigated 
one with the other, Jeshu himself came and 
went with them, and walked with them. 

16 And their eyes were holden, that they should 
not know him. 

17 And he said to them, What are these words 
that you speak with each other, as you walk and 
are sad? 

18 And one of them answered, whose name was 
Kleopha, and said to him, Art thou only a 
stranger from Urishlem, who knowest not what 
hath been done in it in these days? 

19 He saith to them, What? They say to him, 
Concerning Jeshu, who was of Natsrath, a man 
who was a prophet, and mighty in word and in 
deed before Aloha, and before all the people. 

2 And the chief priests and elders delivered him 
to the judgment of death, and crucified him. 

But we had hoped that it was he who shall 
redeem Isroel; and, lo, three days (have passed) 
since all these things were done. 

* But women also of us have astonished us; for 
they were before at the sepulchre; 

?3 and when they found not his body, they came 
and told us that angels they had seen there, and 


(that) they had said concerning him that he was 
alive. 
24 And some also of us went to the sepulchre, 
and found even as the women had said, but him 
they saw not. 
*° Then said Jeshu to them, O wanting in 
understanding, and hard of heart to believe all 
the things which the prophets have spoken! 
*° Was it not to be that these the Meshicha 
should suffer, and enter into his glory? 
*7 And, beginning from Musha and all the 
prophets, he explained to them concerning 
himself from all the scriptures. 
*8 And they drew near to that village to which 
they were going; and he made them suppose 
that to a more distant place he was going. 
*° And they constrained him, and said to him, 
Abide with us, because the day now inclines to 
darken. And he went in to remain with them. 
And it was that, while he reclined with them, 
he took bread, and blessed, and brake, and 
gave to them. 
And at once their eyes were opened, and 
they knew him; and he was taken from them. 
32 And they said one to the other, Did not our 
hearts burn within us, while he spake with us by 
the way, and explained to us the scriptures? 
33 And they arose in the same hour, and 
returned to Urishlem, and found the eleven, who 
were assembled, and they who were with them, 
a saying, Assuredly our Lord is risen, and hath 
appeared unto Shemun. 
> And they also declared those things which 
had happened in the way, and how he was 
made known to them while he brake the bread. 
°° And while they were discoursing, Jeshu stood 
among them, and said to them, Peace be with 
you! | am; fear not. 
37 And they were troubled, and were in fear; for 
they thought they beheld a spirit. 
38 Jeshu saith to them, Why are you perturbed, 
and why arise thoughts in your hearts? 
°° Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I: feel 
me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and 
bones, as you see that | have. 
“° And while these words he spake, he showed 
them his hands and his feet. 
4 And while they as yet believed not for joy, 
and wondered, he said to them, Have you here 
somewhat to eat? 
42 And they gave to him a portion of broiled fish, 
and of the comb of honey; 
“3 and he took (and) did eat before their eyes. 
“* And he said to them, These are the words 
that | spoke with you while | was with you, that 
every thing must be fulfilled which is written in 


the law of Musha, and in the Prophets, and in 
the Psalms, concerning me. 

4 Then opened he their minds, that they might 
understand the scriptures. 

“6 And he said to them, that so it is written, and 
so it was just, that the Meshicha should suffer, 
and should rise from among the dead in the 
three days, 

47 and that in his name should be preached 
repentance and the forgiveness of sins among 
all nations, and that the commencement should 
be from Urishlem. 

è And you are the witnesses of these. 

4 And | will send upon you the promise of my 
Father. But await you in Urishlem the city until 
you be clothed with power from on high. 

°° And he brought them out unto Bethania, and 
lifted up his hands, and blessed them. 

51 And it was that while he blessed them, he 
was separated from them, and he ascended to 
the heavens. 

°? And they worshipped him, and returned to 
Urishlem with great joy. 

°° And at all time were they in the temple, 
praising and blessing Aloha. Amen. 


The Preaching of Juchanon 


1:1 In the beginning was the Word”, and the 


Word himself was with Aloha, and Aloha was the 
Word himself. 

This was in the beginning with Aloha. 

° Every thing by his hand was made; and 
without him also was not one thing made that 
was made. 

* In him was life, and the life is the light of the 
sons of man; 

° And the Light himself in the darkness shineth, 
and the darkness perceived him not. 

ê There was a man who was sent from Aloha, 
his name (was) Juchanon.?”? 

7 He came for the testimony, to testify 
concerning the Light, that all men might believe 
through his ministry.” 

8 He was not the Light himself, but came to 
testify concerning the Light. 

* For that was the true Light that enlighteneth 
every man who cometh into the world. 

10 In the world was he, and the world by his 
hand had been made, and the world knew him 
not. 

11 He came to his own, and his own received 
him not. 

12 But they who received him, he gave to them 
power, that the sons of Aloha they should 
become, to those who believe in his name. 

3 These, not from blood, nor from the will of the 
flesh, nor from the will of man, but from Aloha, 
are born. 

14 And the Word flesh was made, and 
tabernacled with us; and we saw his glory, the 
glory as of the one-begotten who (was) from the 
Father, full of grace and truth. 

15 Juchanon testified concerning him, and cried, 
and said, This is he of whom | said, that he 
cometh after me, and was before?” me, 
because he is anterior” to me. 

1€ And from his fulness we all have received, 
and grace for grace. 

17 For the law by the hand of Musha was given; 
but the truth and the grace were by Jeshu 
Meshicha. 


221 John 1:1 - Meltho 


John 1:6 — Pronounced, Yu'hanon 
John 1:7 - By his hand 

John 1:15a - Kedom, coram, ante 
John 1:15b - Kadomi, antiquus, 
vetus, prior, anterior 


222 
223 
224 
225 


18 Aloha no man hath ever seen: the one- 

begotten God, he who is in the bosom of his 
Father, he hath declared him. 

19 And this was the testimony of Juchanon, 
when the Jihudoyee sent to him from Urishlem 
priests and Levoyee to demand of him, Who art 
thou? 

2 And he confessed, and denied not, but 
confessed, | am not the Meshicha. 

?1 And they asked him again, What then? Art 
thou Elia? And he said, | am not. Art thou the 
Prophet? And he said, No. 

2 And they said to him, And who art thou? That 
we may give an answer to those who sent us. 
What sayest thou of thyself? 

?3 He saith, | am the voice which crieth in the 
wilderness, Make plain the way of the Lorp, as 
said Eshaia the prophet. 

?4 But they who were sent were from the 
Pharishee. 

?5 And they demanded and said to him, Why 
then baptizest thou, if thou art not the Meshicha, 
nor Elia, nor the Prophet? 

? Juchanon answered and said to them, | 
baptize you with waters; but he standeth among 
you whom you know not: 

*7 He it is who cometh after me, and he was 
before me; he, the latchets of whose shoes | am 
not worthy to unloose. 

?8 These things were done in Bethania, at the 
passage of the Jurdan, where Juchanon was 
baptizing. 

*° And the day after, Juchanon seeth Jeshu, 
who was coming to him; and he said, Behold the 
Lamb of Aloha, who beareth the sin of the world! 
3 This is he concerning whom | said, After me 
cometh a man, and he was before me, because 
he is anterior to me. 

31 And | knew him not, but that he should be 
made known unto Isroel, therefore have | come 
with waters to baptize. 

32 And Juchanon testified and said, | saw the 
Spirit descending from heaven as a dove, and it 
remained upon him. 

33 And | knew him not: but he who sent me to 
baptize with water, he said to me, He upon 
whom thou seest the Spirit descend and remain, 
this baptizeth with the Spirit of Holiness: 

3% And I saw, and bare witness that this is the 
Son of Aloha 
3 And the day after Juchanon stood, and two of 
his disciples; 


°° And, contemplating Jeshu as he walked, he 
said, Behold the Lamb of Aloha! 

37 And his two disciples heard him as he spake, 
and they went after Jeshu. 

38 And Jeshu turned (himself), and saw them 
coming after him, and said to them, Whom seek 
you? They say to him, Raban, where dwellest 
thou?” 

°° He saith to them, Come and see. And they 
went and saw where he dwelt; and they were 
with him that day: and it was about the tenth 
hour.” 

“° Now one of those who heard Juchanon and 
went after Jeshu, was Andreas, the brother of 
Shemun. 

#1 This saw first Shemun his brother, and said to 
him, We have found the Meshicha; 

42 And he brought him to Jeshu. And Jeshu saw 
him, and said, Thou art Shemun bar Jona; thou 
shalt be called Kipha.”* 

“3 And the day following Jeshu willed to go forth 
into Galila. And he found Philipos, and said to 
him, Come after me. 

“* Now Philipos was from Beth-tsaida, from the 
city of Andreas and of Shemun. 

4 Philipos found Nathanael, and said to him, 
Him of whom Musha in the law, and the 
prophets, did write we have found, (and) that 
Jeshu (is) he, the son of Jauseph who is from 
Natsrath. 

“6 Saith to him Nathanael, From Natsrath can 
any good thing be? Philipos saith to him, Come 
and see. 

47 And Jeshu saw Nathanael as he was coming 
to him, and said of him, Behold truly a son of 
Isroel who hath no guile in him. 

“8 Nathanael saith to him, Whence knowest 
thou me? Jeshu saith to him, While yet Philipos 
had not called thee, while thou wast under the 
fig-tree, | saw thee. 

“° Nathanael answered and said to him, Rabi, 
thou art the Son of Aloha himself, thou art the 
very King of Isroel. 

° Jeshu saith to him, Upon my telling thee that | 
saw thee under the fig-tree, believest thou? 
Greater things than these thou shalt see. 

1 He saith to him, Amen, amen, | say to you, 
Hereafter you shall see the heavens opened, 
and the angels of Aloha ascending and 
descending unto the Son of man. 


226 John 1:38 - Or, where art thou? 


John 1:39a - Where he was 
John 1:39b - Or, and it was as hours ten 
John 1:42 - Pronounced Kepha 


227 
228 
229 


2:1 And on the third day there was a feast in 
Kotna, a city of Galila; and the mother of Jeshu 
was there: 

? And Jeshu and his disciples were called to the 
feast. 

3 And the wine failed, and his mother saith to 
him, to Jeshu, They have no wine. 

“ Jeshu saith to her, What (is it) to me and to 
thee, woman? Not yet hath come mine hour. 

° His mother saith to the servitors, Whatever he 
telleth you, do. 

ê Now there were six water-pots of stone set 
there, unto the purification of the Jinudoyee, 
which contained each two quarantals””’ or three. 
7 Jeshu saith to them, Fill these water-pots with 
waters; and they filled them to the top. 

è He saith to them, Draw now, and carry to the 
chief of the guests. And they carried. 

? And when that chief of the guests had tasted 
those waters which were made wine, and knew 
not whence it was, (but the servitors knew, who 
had filled them with waters,) the chief of the 
guests called the bridegroom, 

And said to him, Every man at first the good 
wine produceth, and when they are satisfied, 
then that which is inferior;*°’ but thou hast kept 
the good wine until now. 

"' This is the first sign that Jeshu wrought in 
Kotna of Galila, and manifested his glory; and 
his disciples believed in him. 

12 After this he went to Kapher-nachum, he and 
his mother and his brethren and his disciples. 
And they were there a few days. 

13 And the petscha of the Jihudoyee was nigh, 
and Jeshu went up to Urishlem. 

14 And he found in the temple those who sold 
oxen and sheep and doves, and the money- 
changers sitting. 

° And he made him a scourge of cord, and 
drove them all from the temple, and the sheep 
and the oxen and the money-changers; and he 
shed their money, and their tables he 
overturned. 

16 And to those who sold doves he said, Take 
these hence; make not the house of my Father a 
house of merchandise. 

17 And his disciples remembered that it was 
written, The zeal of thy house hath devoured 
me. 

18 The Jinudoyee answered and said to him, 
What sign showest thou to us, as these things 
thou doest? 


739 John 2:6 - Rebeen 


31 John 2:10 - Smaller 


19 Jeshu answered, Destroy this temple, and in 
three days | will raise it. 

°° The Jihudoyee say to him, Forty-and six 
years was this temple being built, and wilt thou 
in three days raise it? 

=" But he spake of the temple of his body. 

?? But when he was risen from the house of the 
dead, his disciples remembered that this he had 
said; and they believed the scriptures, and the 
word which Jeshu had spoken. 

?3 While Jeshu was in Jerusalem at the petscha, 
at the feast, many believed in him who saw the 
signs which he wrought. 

** But he, Jeshu, did not confide himself to 
them, because he knew every man, 

*° And needed not that any should testify to him 
concerning any man, because he knew what is 
in man. 


3:1 But there was one of the Pharishee whose 
name was Nikodimos, a ruler of the Jinudoyee: 
? This came to Jeshu in the night, and said to 
him, Rabi, we know that from Aloha thou art sent 
a teacher; for no man can these signs perform 
which thou doest, unless Aloha be with him. 
Jeshu answered and said to him, Amen, 
amen, | say to thee, Except a man be born 
anew, he cannot see the kingdom of Aloha. 
4 Nikodimos said to him, How can an old man 
be born? Who can again the womb of his mother 
the second time enter, and be born? 
° Jeshu answered and said to him, Amen, 
amen, | say to thee, That if a man be not born of 
waters and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the 
kingdom of Aloha. 
ê Whatever is born of the flesh, is flesh; and 
whatever is born of the Spirit, is spirit. 
7 Wonder not that | have said to thee, that it 
behoves you to be born anew. 
è The wind bloweth where she willeth,”? and 
her voice thou hearest; but thou knowest not 
whence she cometh, nor whither she goeth: so 
is every man who is born of the Spirit. 
Nikodimos answered and said to him, How 
can these things be? 
Jeshu answered and said to him, Art thou 
Malphona of Israel, and these knowest not? 
Amen, amen, | say to thee, What we know we 
speak, and what we have seen we testify; but 
our testimony you receive not. 
12 If of (what is) on earth | tell you, and you 
believe not, how if I tell you of (what is) in 
heaven, could you believe me? 


232 


232 John 3:8 — Greek has, “The Spirit bloweth where 


he willeth” 


13 And no man hath ascended into heaven, but 
he who descended from heaven, the Son of 
man, he who is in heaven. 

14 And as Musha elevated the serpent in the 
wilderness, so is to be elevated the Son of man, 

15 That every man who believeth in him might 
not perish, but have the life which is eternal. 

16 For so loved Aloha the world, as his Son, the 
Only-begotten, he would give, that every one 
who believeth in him might not perish, but have 
the life which is eternal. 

17 For Aloha sent not his Son into the world to 
condemn the world, but that the world might live 
by him. 

18 He who believeth on him is not judged, and 
he who believeth not is judged already, because 
he believeth not in the name of the only- 
begotten Son of Aloha. 

19 And this is the judgment, that the light hath 
come into the world, and the sons of men have 
loved darkness rather than the light, for their 
deeds have been evil. 

For every one who doeth abominable things 
hateth the light, and cometh not to the light, lest 
his deeds should be reproved. 

?1 But he who doeth the truth cometh to the 
light, that his works may be known that in Aloha 
they are wrought. 

22 After these came Jeshu and his disciples into 
the land of Jinuda, and there conversed with 
them and baptized. 

?3 But Juchanon also was baptizing in Ein-yon, 
near Sholim, because the waters were there 
many; and they came and were baptized; 

*4 Eor not yet was Juchanon cast into the house 
of the bound. 

*° But there was a question with some of the 
disciples of Juchanon (and) a certain Jihudoya, 
upon purification. 

*° And they came to Juchanon, and said to him, 
Raban, he who was with thee at the passage of 
Jurdan, (and) concerning whom thou didst give 
witness, he also baptizeth, and many come to 
him. 

*7 Juchanon answered and said to them, A man 
cannot receive of his own will any thing, unless it 
be given to him from heaven. 

You bear me witness that | said, | am not the 
Meshicha, but | am an apostle?” before him. 

*° He that hath the bride is the bridegroom; but 
the friend of the bridegroom, who standeth and 
attendeth him, with great joy rejoiceth on 
account of the voice of the bridegroom: this my 
joy therefore, behold, is complete. 


233 John 3:28 - Shelicho 


°° To him it must be to increase, and to me to 
decrease. 

31 For he who from above hath come, is above 
all; and he who is from the earth, is of the earth, 
and of the earth speaketh: he who from heaven 
hath come, is above all. 

32 And what he hath seen and heard he 
testifieth, and his testimony no man receiveth. 

33 But he who hath received his testimony, hath 
sealed that the true Aloha is he.” 

4 For he whom Aloha hath sent, the very words 
of Aloha speaketh; for it was not in measure that 
Aloha gave the Spirit. 

35 The Father loveth the Son, and every thing 
hath he given into his hands. 

°° He who believeth in the Son hath the life 
which is eternal; and he who obeyeth not the 
Son shall not see life, but the wrath of Aloha 
remaineth on him. 


4:1 But when Jeshu knew that the Pharishee 
had heard that he had made many disciples, 
and baptized more than Juchanon, 

(though it was not Jeshu himself baptized, but 
his disciples,) 

< He left Jihuda, and came again into Galila. 

“ And he needed that in going he should pass 
through among the Shomroyee; 

° And he came to a city of the Shomroyee which 
is called Shokar, nigh to the field which Jakub 
gave unto Jauseph his son. 

And the fountain of water of Jakub was there. 
But Jeshu was wearied with the labour of the 
way, and sat by the fountain; and it was six 
hours. 

7 There came a woman from Shomreen to draw 
waters, and Jeshu said to her, Give me waters 
to drink. 

8 Now his disciples had gone into the city to buy 
for them meat. 

? The woman, the Shomroytha, saith to him, 
How (canst) thou who art a Jihudoya ask drink 
of me who am a woman, a Shomroytha? For the 
Jihudoyee have no accommodation*” with the 
Shomroyee. 

Jeshu answered and said to her, If thou hadst 
known the gift of Aloha, and who He is who hath 
said to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldst 
have asked of him, and he had given thee living 
waters. 


234 John 3:33 - D'Aloha sharira-u: compare the same 


words, 1 John v. 20 
23 John 4:9 - Vide MASII Pec. Syr., in voce Chashach 


" That woman saith to him, My Lord, thou hast 
no vessel, and the well is deep; whence hast 
thou living waters? 

? Art thou greater than our father Jakub, he 
who gave us this well, and himself drank of it, 
and his children, and his flocks? 

13 Jeshu answered and said to her, Every one 
who shall drink of these waters again will thirst; 

“ But every one who shall drink of the waters 
that | will give him shall never thirst; but those 
waters that | shall give him shall be in him a 
fountain of waters, that shall spring forth to the 
life of eternity. 

° That woman saith to him, My Lord, give me of 
those waters, that | thirst not again, nor come to 
draw from hence. 

"6 Jeshu saith to her, Go, call thy husband, and 
come hither. 

7 She saith to him, | have no husband. Jeshu 
saith to her, Well hast thou said, | have no 
husband; 

18 Eor five husbands hast thou had, and this 
whom thou now hast is not thy husband; this 
hast thou said truly. 

That woman saith to him, My Lord, | perceive 
that thou art a prophet. 

° Our fathers in this mountain worshipped, and 
you say that in Urishlem is the place where it 
behoves to worship. 

?1 Jeshu saith to her, Woman, believe me that 
the hour cometh when neither in this mountain, 
nor at Urishlem, you shall worship the Father: 

22 You worship something you know not; but we 
worship whom we know; for salvation” is from 
the Jinudoyee. 

?3 But the hour cometh, and now is, when the 
true worshippers will worship the Father in spirit 
and in truth; for the Father also requireth 
worshippers such as these. 

For Aloha is a Spirit; and they who worship 
him, in spirit and in truth must worship. 

35 That woman saith to him, | know that the 
Meshicha cometh; and when he hath come, he 
will teach us all things. 

°° Jeshu saith to her, | am (he), | who speak 
with thee. 

7 And as he spoke, his disciples came, and 
they wondered that with the woman he spoke; 
but no man said, What inquirest thou? Or, Why 
speakest thou with her? 

The woman left her water-pot, and went into 
the city, and saith, 


23 John 4:22 - Or, life 


237 John 4:26 - Ano-no dammalel-no amek 


*° Come, see a man who hath told me every 
thing that | have done: is not this the Meshicha? 
3 And the men went out of the city, and came 
with her. 

31 Between these things his disciples entreated 
of him, saying to him, Raban, eat. 

*? But he said to them, | have food to eat of 
which you know not. 

33 The disciples say among themselves, Has 
any man brought him somewhat to eat? 

34 Jeshu saith to them, My meat is to do the will 
of Him who sent me, and to accomplish his 
work. 

35 Say you not, that after four moons cometh 
harvest? Behold, | tell you, Lift up your eyes, 
and see the lands which have become white for 
the harvest already. 

°° And he who reapeth receiveth wages, and 
gathereth fruit unto life eternal; and the sower 
and the reaper shall rejoice together. 

37 For in this is the proverb true, One soweth, 
and another reapeth. 

| sent you to reap that (for) which you did not 
toil; for others toiled, and you have entered upon 
their labour. 

Now of that city many Shomroyee believed in 
him, because of the saying of that woman, who 
testified, He told me every thing that | have 
done. 

“° And when those Shomroyee came to him, 
they besought him to be with them. And he was 
with them two days, 

4 And many believed through his word. 

42 And they said to the woman, Now not through 
thy word believe we in him; for we have heard 
and known that this is truly the Meshicha, the 
Saviour of the world. 

“3 And after two days Jeshu went forth from 
thence, and came into Galila; 

“ For he himself testified, that a prophet in his 
own city is not honoured. 

° But when he came to Galila, the Galiloyee 
received him, because they had seen all the 
signs which he had done in Urishlem at the 
feast; for they also went to the feast. 

So Jeshu came again into Kotna of Galila, 
where he had made the waters wine. And there 
was at Kapher-nachum the servant of a certain 
king, whose son was ill. 

7 This (man) heard that Jeshu had come from 
Jihuda into Galila; and he came to him, and 
besought him that he would come down and 
heal his son, for he was near to die. 


238 John 4:37 - Or, Another soweth, and another 


reapeth 


“8 Jeshu saith to him, If signs and wonders you 
do not see, you will not believe. 

“° The servant of the king saith to him, My lord, 
come down ere my child die! 

°° Jeshu saith to him, Go, thy son liveth. And 
the man believed in the word which Jeshu had 
spoken to him, and went. 

" But as he was going down, his servants met 
him, and gave him good news,” saying to him, 
Thy son liveth. 

52 And he asked at what time he was healed. 
They say to him, Yesterday, at seven hours, the 
fever left him. 

°8 And his father knew that in that hour it was in 
which Jeshu said to him, Thy son liveth; and he 
believed, and all his house. 

54 This is again the second sign (which) Jeshu 
did when he had come from Jihuda into Galila. 


5:1 After these there was a feast of the 

Jihudoyee, and Jeshu went up to Urishlem. 
Now there was there in Urishlem a certain 

place of ablution,““° which was called in Hebrew 

Beth-chesda, and having in it five porticoes. 

° And in these were many infirm people," blind 

and lame and withered, awaiting the moving of 

the waters. 

“ For an angel at times descended to the pool 

and moved the waters; and he who first 

descended after the movement of the waters 

was healed of whatever disease he had. 

° But a certain man was there who for thirty- 

and-eight years had been in a disease. 

ê Jeshu saw this (man) as he lay, and knew that 

for a long time he had (been thus), and said to 

him, Art thou willing to be healed? 

7 The diseased man answered and said, Yes, 

my Lord; but | have no man who, when the 

waters are moved, shall cast me into the pool: 

but while | am coming, another before me 

descendeth. 

8 Jeshu saith to him, Arise, take up thy bed, and 

walk. 

? And in the instant that man was healed, and, 

arising, he took up his bed, and walked: and that 

day was the shabath. 

10 And the Jihudoyee said to him who had been 

healed, This is the shabath: it is not lawful for 

thee to carry thy bed. 


242 


239 John 4:51 - Sabaruhi 


John 5:2 - Or, of baptism 
John 5:3 - People of infirmities 
John 5:4 - Mamuditha, bath, baptistery 


240 
241 
242 


" But he answered and said to them, He who 
made me whole, he said to me, Take up thy 
bed, and walk. 

12 And they said to him, What man is this who 
told thee to take up thy bed, and walk? 

13 But he who had been healed knew not who it 
was; for Jeshu had retired among the great 
multitude which was in that place. 

14 After a time Jeshu found him in the temple, 
and said to him, Behold, thou art healed: sin not 
again, lest there be to thee that which is worse 
than the first. 

13 And that man went away, and told the 
Jihudoyee, that it was Jeshu who had healed 
him. 

‘© On account of this the Jinudoyee persecuted 
Jeshu, and sought to kill him, because these 
things he had done on the shabath. 

17 But he, Jeshu, said to them, My Father until 
now worketh, | also work. 

18 But on this account the more sought the 
Jihudoyee to kill him, not only because he had 
loosed the shabath, but also that of Aloha he 
had said that he was his Father, and had made 
himself equal with Aloha. 

But Jeshu answered and said to them, Amen, 
amen, | say to you, The Son cannot do any thing 
from the will of himself, but that which he seeth 
the Father do. For those which the Father doeth, 
these also the Son likewise doeth. 
°° For the Father loveth the Son, and every 
thing that he doeth he showeth him; and greater 
than these works he showeth him, that you may 
wonder. 

?1 For as the Father raiseth the dead, and 
quickeneth, so also the Son quickeneth those 
whom he willeth. 

?2 For the Father judgeth no man, but all 
judgment he hath given to the Son; 

?3 That all men should honour the Son, as they 
honour the Father. He who honoureth not the 
Son, honoureth not the Father who sent him. 

4 Amen, amen, | say to you, He who heareth 
my word and believeth on him who sent me, 
hath the life that is eternal, and into 
condemnation he cometh not, but hath passed 
from death unto life. 

Amen, amen, | say to you, That the hour 
cometh and also now is, when the dead shall 
hear the voice of the Son of Aloha; and they who 
hear shall live. 


6 For as the Father hath life in his person,” so 
hath he given also to the Son to have life in his 
person,” 
*7 And hath empowered him also to execute 
judgment. 
?8 Because he is the Son of man, marvel not at 
this; for the hour cometh when all they who are 
in the sepulchres shall hear his voice, 
2° And shall come forth; they who have done 
good unto the resurrection of life, and they who 
have done evil unto the resurrection of 
condemnation. 
30 | cannot of the will of myself do any thing; but 
as | hear | judge, and my judgment is just; for | 
seek not my will, but the will of Him who sent 
me. 
31 If | should witness concerning myself, my 
testimony would not be (regarded as) truth: 
32 There is another who witnesseth of me, and | 
know that true is his testimony which he hath 
witnessed of me. 

You sent to Juchanon, and he witnessed of 
the truth. 
34 But | do not from man (only) receive 
testimony. But these (things) speak | that you 
may be saved. 

He was a lamp that burneth and shineth, and 
you were willing to glory for the hour in his light. 
°° But | have a testimony which is greater than 
that of Juchanon; for the works that the Father 
hath given me to accomplish, these works that | 
do testify of me that the Father hath sent me. 
37 And the Father who hath sent me, he 
testifieth of me: but his voice you have never 
heard, nor his appearance seen. 
38 And his word abideth not in you, because in 
Him whom he hath sent you do not believe. 
39 Investigate the scriptures; for in them you 
think you have the life that is eternal, and they 
testify of me. 

And you will not come to me that the life that 
is eternal you might have. 

1 Glory from the sons of men | receive not. 

But | know you, that the love of Aloha is not in 
you. 
“3 | have come in the name of my Father, and 
you have not received me. If another should 
come in his own name, him you would receive. 
“* How can you believe, who glory one from 
another are receiving, and the glory which is 
from one, Aloha, you seek not? 


28 John 5:26a - Ba-knumeh, in his person or 


substance 
24 John 5:26b - q’nomah “individual existence” 


4 How think you that I will accuse you before 
the Father? There is one who accuseth you, 
Musha himself, in whom you hope. 

“6 Eor if in Musha you had believed, you would 
also have believed in me; for Musha of me hath 
written. 

“” But if his writings you believe not, how my 
words will you believe? 


6:1 After these Jeshu went over the Sea of 
Galila of Tiberios, 

? And great multitudes went after him, because 
they had seen the signs which he wrought on 
the diseased. 

? And Jeshu ascended a mountain, and there 
sat with his disciples. 

Now the feast of the petscha of the Jinudoyee 
drew nigh. 

° And Jeshu lifted up his eyes, and saw the 
great assembly which had come to him; and he 
said to Philipos, Whence shall we buy bread, 
that these may eat? 

But this he said trying him; for he knew what 
he was about to do. 

Philipos saith to him, Two hundred dinoreen of 
bread is not sufficient for them, that a little every 
one of them may take. 
® Saith to him one of his disciples, Andreas, 
brother of Shemun Kipha, 

? There is here a certain youth, who hath with 
him five cakes of barley and two fishes; but 
these what are they for these all? 

10 Jeshu saith to them, Make all the men 
recline; for there was much herbage in that 
place. And the men reclined, in number five 
thousand. 

11 And Jeshu took the bread, and blessed, and 
divided unto those who reclined, and likewise 
also of the fishes, as much as they willed. 

12 And when they were satisfied, he said to his 
disciples, Gather the fragments that abound, 
that nothing be lost; 

13 And they gathered and filled twelve baskets 
of fragments, those which abounded unto them 
who had eaten of the five loaves of barley. 

14 But those men, when they had seen the sign 
which Jeshu had wrought, said, Truly this is the 
Prophet that cometh into the world. 

But when Jeshu knew that they were about to 
come to seize him and make him the King, he 
passed away to a mountain alone. 
1€ And when it was eventide, his disciples went 
down to the sea. 

17 And they sat in a vessel, and went over for 
Kapher-nachum. And it was dark, and Jeshu 
had not come to them. 


18 But the sea had risen against them, because 
a great wind blew. 

1° And they had led stadia twenty-five or thirty, 
and they saw Jeshu walking upon the sea, and 
drawing nigh to the vessel; and they feared. 

20 But Jeshu himself said to them, | am, fear 
not. 

?1 And they willed to receive him into the vessel, 
and soon** that vessel was at that land to which 
they were going. 

*? The day after the people that stood on the 
opposite shore of the sea saw that there was not 
another vessel there except that into which the 
disciples had ascended, and that Jeshu had not 
entered with his disciples into the vessel; 

*° But there came other boats from Tiberios 
near the place, where they did eat bread when 
Jeshu had blessed. 

24 And when that company saw that Jeshu was 
not there nor his disciples, they ascended into 
those boats, and came to Kapher-nachum. And 
they sought Jeshu; 

*° And when they had found him on the 
opposite side of the sea, they say to him, 
Raban, when camest thou hither? 

6 Jeshu answered and said to them, Amen, 
amen, | tell you, You seek me, not because you 
considered the signs, but because you did eat 
the bread, and were satisfied. 

*7 Work not (for) the food which perisheth, but 
(for) the food that endureth unto the life that is 
eternal, which the Son of man shall give to you: 
for this hath the Father sealed, (even) Aloha. 

?8 They say to him, What shall we do that we 
may work the works of Aloha? 

°° Jeshu answered and said to them, This is the 
work of Aloha, that you believe in Him whom he 
hath sent. 

°° They say to him, What sign doest thou that 
we may see, and believe in thee? What 
performest thou? 

31 Our fathers manna did eat in the desert, as it 
is written, that bread from heaven be gave them 
to eat. 

32 Jeshu saith to them, Amen, amen, | tell you, 
That Musha gave you not that bread from 
heaven, but my Father giveth you the true bread 
from heaven: 

33 For the bread of Aloha is He who hath 
descended from heaven, and giveth life to the 
world. 

34 They say to him, Our Lord, 
us this bread. 


246 at all time give 


24 John 6:21 - Boh bashoto, in the hour 


246 John 6:34 - Maran 


35 Jeshu saith to them, | am the bread of life: he 
who cometh to me shall not hunger, and he who 
believeth in me shall not thirst, for ever. 

°° But | have told you that you have seen me, 
and have not believed. 

Yi Every one whom the Father hath given me, 
unto me will come; and him who unto me shall 
come, | will not cast out. 

38 | descended from heaven not to do mine own 
will, but the will of Him who sent me. 

°° But this is the will of my Father who sent me, 
that of all whom he hath given me | shall lose 
not of him, but shall raise him at the last day. 

° For this is the will of my Father, that every 
one who seeth the Son and believeth on him, 
shall have the life that is eternal, and | will raise 
him at the last day. 

1 But the Jihudoyee murmured against him 
because he said, | am the bread which hath 
descended from heaven. 

42 And they said, Is not this Jeshu bar Jauseph, 
he whose father and mother we know? And how 
saith this, From heaven | have descended? 

Jeshu answered and said to them, Murmur 
not one with another. 

No man can come to me unless the Father 
who sent me shall attract him, and | will raise 
him at the last day. 

* it is written in the prophet, that they shall be 
all taught of Aloha: every one, therefore, who 
hath heard from the Father and learned of him, 
cometh unto me. 

46 There is no man who hath seen the Father, 
but he who is from Aloha, he hath seen the 
Father. 

‘7 Amen, amen, | say to you, Whosoever 
believeth in me hath the life which is eternal. 

48 | am the bread of life. 

? Your fathers did eat manna in the desert, and 
are dead: 
°° but this is the bread which hath descended 
from heaven, that man may eat of it, and die not. 
51 | am the bread of life that from heaven hath 
descended; and if man shall eat of this bread, he 
shall live for ever; and the bread that | will give is 
my body, which for the life of the world I give. 
°? The Jihudoyee contended one with another, 
saying, How can this his body give to us to eat? 
53 And Jeshu said to them, Amen, amen, | tell 
you, That unless you eat the body” of the Son 
of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in 
yourselves. 


247 John 6:53 - Phagreh 


54 He who eateth of my body, and drinketh of 
my blood, hath the life which is eternal, and | will 
raise him at the last day. 
°° For my body is truly food, and my blood is 
truly drink. 
°° He who eateth my body, and drinketh my 
blood, abideth in me, and | in him. 
57 As the Father the Living (one) who hath sent 
me, and | live by the Father, even so he who 
shall eat me, shall live, too, by me. 
58 This is the bread which hath descended from 
heaven. Not as was the manna that your fathers 
ate, and are dead; he who eateth of this bread 
shall live for ever. 
°° These things he spake in the synagogue, as 
he taught in Kapher-nachum. 
€ And many of his disciples who heard said, A 
hard word is this: who can hear it? 
ê1 But Jeshu knew in himself that his disciples 
murmured concerning this; and he said to them, 
Does this stumble you? 
ê? If you shall see then the Son of man ascend 
up to the place where he was from the first? 
® It is the Spirit that maketh alive, the body 
profiteth nothing: the words which | have spoken 
to you, they are spirit and they are life. 
ê But there are some of you who do not 
believe. For Jeshu knew from the first who they 
were who believed not, and who it was who 
would betray him. 
ê And he said to them, On account of this | told 
you that no man can come to me, unless it be 
given him of my Father. 
°° On account of this word many of his disciples 
went back, and walked not with him. 
ê Jeshu said to the twelve, Do you also will to 
go? 
°8 Shemun Kipha answered and said, My Lord, 
unto whom shall we go? Thou hast the words of 
eternal life; 
ê And we believe and know that thou art the 
Meshicha, the Son of Aloha the Living. 
7° Jeshu saith to them, Have | not chosen you 
twelve, and from you one is Satana? 

He spake concerning Jihuda bar Shemun 
Scarjuta; for he it was who would betray him, 
one from the twelve. 


7:1 After these Jeshu walked in Galila; for he 
would not walk in Jihuda, because the 
Jihudoyee had sought to kill him. 

? And the feast of tabernacles of the Jihudoyee 
drew nigh. 

3 And his brethren said to Jeshu, Remove thee 
hence, and go into Jihuda, that thy disciples may 
see the works which thou doest. 


“ For there is no man who doeth any thing in 
concealment, and willeth himself to be in 
openness: if these things thou doest, show 
thyself to the world. 

° For neither did his brethren believe in him, in 
Jeshu. 

ê Jeshu saith to them, My time until now cometh 
not, but your time is always ready. 

7 The world cannot hate you: but me it hateth, 
because | bear witness against it that the works 
of it are evil. 

8 Go you up to this feast: | do not ascend now to 
this feast, because my time is not yet complete. 
* These things said he, and remained in Galila. 

1 But when his brethren had ascended to the 
feast, then also he ascended; not in openness, 
but as in concealment. 

" But the Jinudoyee sought him at the feast, 
and said, Where is he? 

12 And there was great murmuring concerning 
him among the people; for some said that he 
was good, and others said, No; but he deceiveth 
the people. 

13 But no man openly spoke of him, for fear of 
the Jinudoyee. 

14 But when the days of the feast divided, Jeshu 
ascended to the temple, and taught. 

15 And the Jinudoyee wondered and said, How 
knoweth this man the scripture, when he hath 
not learned? 

1€ Jeshu answered and said, My doctrine is not 
mine, but his who sent me. 

17 Whosoever willeth to do his will 
understandeth my doctrine, if it be from Aloha, 
or (if) from the will of myself | speak. 

18 He who from the will of his (own) mind 
speaketh, the glory of himself seeketh; but he 
who the glory of him who hath sent him seeketh, 
is true, and no iniquity is in him. 

19 Did not Musha give you the law? But no man 
of you keepeth the law. 
°° Why seek you to kill me? The people 
answered, saying, Thou hast a demon: who 
seeketh to kill thee? 

Jeshu answered and said to them, One work 
have | performed, and all of you wondered on 
this account. 

Musha gave you circumcision, not because it 
was from the fathers, and on the shabath you 
circumcise a man. 

?3 But if a man is circumcised on the day of 
shabath because the law of Musha may not be 
broken, why against me do you murmur, 
because | have altogether healed a man on the 
day of shabath? 


*4 Judge not with acceptance of persons,”®? but 
righteous judgment judge you. 

? And some of Urishlem said, Is not this he 
whom they seek to kill? 

7° And, behold, openly he discourseth, and 
nothing say they to him. Do the elders know that 
this is truly the Meshicha? 

*7 Vet of this we know from whence he is; but 
when the Meshicha cometh, no man knoweth 
from whence he is. 

*8 Jeshu lifted up his voice as he taught in the 
temple, and said, You know me, and from 
whence | am you know: and of myself | am not 
come; but true is he who sent me, he whom you 
know not. 

*° But | know him who am from him; and he 
hath sent me. 

°° And they sought to apprehend him; but no 
man laid hands on him, because not yet was 
come his hour. 

31 But many of the multitude believed in him, 
and said, When the Meshicha is come, will he 
exceed the miracles which this doeth? 

32 The Pharishee heard the assembly, that they 
said these things of him, and the chief priests 
sent officers to apprehend him. 

33 Jeshu said, Yet a little while am | with you, 
and | go unto him who sent me: 

4 And you will seek me, and shall not find me: 
and where | am you cannot come. 

°° The Jinudoyee say among themselves, 
Whither is this about to go, that we cannot find 
him? To the countries of the nations is he to go, 
and to teach the Heathens? 

°° What is this word he hath said, You shall 
seek me, and not find me; and where | am you 
cannot come? 

37 But in the great day, which was the last of the 
feast, stood Jeshu and cried, and said, If (any) 
man thirst, let him come unto me and drink; 

38 For whosoever believeth in me, as have said 
the scriptures, rivers of living waters shall flow 
from his belly. 

? But this he spake of the Spirit which they 
should receive who believe in him. For not yet 
was the Spirit given, because not yet was Jeshu 
glorified. 

Now many of the assemblies who heard his 
words said, This is truly the Prophet. 

Others said, This is the Meshicha. Others 
said, How from Galila cometh the Meshicha? 
“? Hath not the scripture said, That from the 
seed of David, and from Beth-lechem the town 
of David, cometh the Meshicha? 


248 John 7:24 - With acceptance of faces 


“3 And there was a division concerning him 
among the assemblies; 

44 And there were men of them who would have 
apprehended him; but no man laid hands on 
him. 

45 And those officers came to the chief priests 
and the Pharishee; and the priests said to them, 
Why have you not brought him? 

“6 The officers say to them, Never so spake a 
son of man as speaks this man! 

47 The Pharishee say to them, Are you also 
deceived? 

ê Have any of the heads, or of the Pharishee, 
believed in him? 

* But if this people who know not the law 
(believe in him), they are accursed. 

°° One of them, Nikodimos, he who came to 
Jeshu by night, saith to them, 

°' Does our law condemn a man unless it shall 
hear from him first, and know what he hath 
done? 

°? They answered and said to him, Art thou also 
of Galila? Investigate, and see, that the Prophet 
from Galila ariseth not. 


8:12 But again“ spake Jeshu with them, and 
said, | am the Light of the world: he who 
followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall 
find the light of life. 

13 The Pharishee say to him, Thou of 
testifiest: thy testimony is not the truth. 

14 Jeshu answered and said to them, Though | 
testify of myself, my testimony is the truth: 
because | know from whence | am, and whither | 
go. But you know not from whence | am, nor 
whither | go. 

15 You judge carnally; but I judge no man. 

16 Vet if | judge, my judgment is true: because | 
am not alone, but | and my Father who sent me. 

17 So in your law it is written, that the testimony 
of two men is truth: 

18 | am (one) who testify of myself, and my 
Father who sent me testifieth (also) of me. 

19 They say to him, Where is thy Father? Jeshu 
answered and said to them, You know neither 
me, nor my Father; for if me you had known, my 
Father also would you have known. 

These words spake Jeshu in the house of 
treasure, as he taught in the temple: and no man 
apprehended him; for not yet had come his hour. 


230 thyself 


24 John 8:12 — Verses 7:53-8:11 is omitted in the 


Peschito 
2 John 8:13 - Or, concerning 


*" Jeshu said again, | go, and you will seek me, 
and will die in your sins; and where | go you 
cannot come. 
2 The Jihudoyee say, Will he kill himself then? 
For he saith, Whither | go you cannot come. 
?3 And he said to them, From beneath are you: 
but | am from above: you are of this world; but | 
am not of this world. 
** | said to you, that you will die in your sins: for 
if you believe not that | am, you will die in your 
sins. 
*° The Jihudoyee say, Who art thou? Jeshu 
saith to them, The same that | began to tell 
you.” 
8 Much have I against you to say and to judge: 
but he who hath sent me is true; and those 
(things) which | have heard from him these 
speak | in the world. 

But they knew not that of the Father he spake 
to them. 
?8 Jeshu saith to them again, When you have 
lifted up the Son of man, then shall you know 
that | am (he), and (that) nothing from myself | 
do; but as the Father hath taught me, so | speak. 
2° And he who sent me is with me: my Father 
hath not left me alone; for whatever is pleasing 
to him | do at all time. 
3 And as these (words) he spake, many 
believed on him. 
31 And Jeshu said to those Jihudoyee who 
believed on him, If you persevere in my 
doctrine,” you shall be truly my disciples; 
32 And you shall know the truth, and the truth 
shall liberate you. 
33 They say to him, We are the seed of 
Abraham, and never service to man have we 
performed; how sayest thou that we shall be 
sons of freedom? 
34 Jeshu saith to them, Amen | tell you, 
Whoever doeth sin is the servant of sin. 
3 And the servant abideth not for ever in the 
house, but the Son for ever abideth. 
°° If He therefore, the Son, shall liberate you, 
truly shall you be sons of freedom. 
37 | know that you are the seed of Abraham; but 
you seek to kill me, because in my word you do 
not concur. 
38 That which | have seen with my Father | 
speak, and that which you have seen with your 
father you do. 
°° They answered and said to him, Our father is 
Abraham. Jeshu saith to them, If you were the 
31 John 8:25 - Or, to speak with you 
John 8:31 — My word 
John 8:37 - Or, acquiesce 


252 
253 


sons of Abraham, the works of Abraham you 
would do. 

“° But now you seek to kill me, the man who the 
truth has spoken with you, which | have heard 
from Aloha. This Abraham did not. 

“ But you do the deeds of your father. They say 
to him, We from fornication are not; one Father 
have we, Aloha. 

42 Jeshu saith to them, If Aloha were your 
Father, you would love me; for | from Aloha 
came forth, and | came not of myself, but he 
sent me. 

“8 Wherefore my word do you not 
acknowledge? Because you cannot hear my 
word. 

“* You are from your father the accuser, and the 
desires of your father you are willing to do. He 
from the beginning was the killer of men, and in 
the truth he stood not; therefore the truth is not 
in him. And when he speaketh a lie, of his own 
he speaketh, because of falsity he is also the 
father. 

4 But | (speak the truth, and) because the truth 
| speak, you believe me not. 

Who of you convicteth me of sin? Yet if the 
truth | speak, why do you not believe me? 

He who is of Aloha the words of Aloha 
heareth: therefore you hear not, because you 
are not of Aloha. 

“8 The Jihudoyee answered and say to him, Did 
we not well say, Thou art a Shomroya, and hast 
a devil? 

“8 Jeshu said to them, | have no devil; but my 
Father | honour, and you debase me. 

°° But | seek not my own glory; He is, who 
seeketh and judgeth. 

51 Amen, amen, | say to you, That he who my 
word keepeth, death shall not see for ever. 

°? The Jihudoyee say to him, Now we know that 
thou hast a devil. Abraham is dead, and the 
prophets; and thou sayest, that he who thy word 
keepeth, death shall not taste for ever. 

°° Art thou greater than our father Abraham, 
who is dead; and than the prophets, who are 
dead? What makest thou thyself? 

5t Jeshu said to them, If | glorify myself, my 
glory is nothing: it is my Father who glorifieth 
me; he, of whom you say that he is your God. 

But you know him not; but | Know him: and 
should | say that | know him not, | should be a 
liar like you. But | know him, and keep his words. 
è Abraham, your father, desired to see my day, 
and he saw, and was glad. 

° The Jihudoyee said to him, Yet the son of fifty 
years thou art not, and Abraham hast thou 
seen? 


°8 Jeshu saith to them, Amen, amen, | say to 
you, Before Abraham was, | am. 

°° And they took up stones to stone him; but 
Jeshu concealed himself, and went from the 

temple, and passed among them, and went. 


9:1 And as he was passing, he saw a man blind 
from the womb of his mother. 

? And his disciples asked him, saying, Raban, 
who sinned, this or his parents, that blind he 
should have been born? 

3 Jeshu saith to them, Neither he sinned, nor his 
parents; but that there might be seen in him the 
works of Aloha. 

Me it behoveth to do the works of Him who 
sent me, while it is to-day: the night cometh 
when man cannot work. 

5 So long as | am in the world, | am the Light of 
the world. 

ê And when he had said these things, he spat 
upon the ground, and formed clay from his 
spittle, and rubbed upon the eyes of the blind, 

And said to him, Go, wash in the pool of 
Shilucha. And he went, washed, and came 
seeing. 

ê But his neighbours, and they who had seen 
(him) aforetime as he begged, said, Is not this 
he who sat and begged? 

? Some said, It is he; and some said, It is not, 
but one like him; but he said, | am he. 

1° They say to him, How were thine eyes 
opened? 

" He answered and said to them, The man 
whose name is Jeshu made clay, and rubbed 
upon mine eyes, and said to me, Go, wash in 
the waters of Shilucha; and | went, washed, and 
received sight. 

12 They say to him, Where is he? He saith to 
them, | know not. 

19 They brought him who from the beginning 
was blind to the Pharishee. 

Now it was shabath when Jeshu made the 
clay and opened his eyes: 

And again the Pharishee questioned him, 
How didst thou receive sight? He said to them, 
He put clay upon mine eyes, and | washed, and 
received sight. 

And some of the Pharishee said, This man is 
not from Aloha; for the shabath he keepeth not. 
But others said, How can a man, a sinner, 
perform these signs? And there was a division 
among them. 

17 They say again to the blind, What sayest thou 
concerning him, because he hath opened thine 
eyes? He saith to them, | say that he is the 
Prophet. 


18 But believed not concerning him the 
Jihudoyee that blind he had been and made-to- 
see, until they called the parents of him who had 
been made to see, 

19 And asked them, If this is your son who, you 
say, was born blind, how now doth he see? 
°° His parents answered and said, We know 
that this (is) our son, and that blind he was born. 
=" But how he now seeth, or who hath opened 
his eyes, we know not. He also hath entered on 
his years, ask him: he for himself shall speak. 

2 These words said his parents, because they 
feared the Jinudoyee; for the Jinudoyee had 
determined that if any man should confess him 
that he was the Meshicha, they would cast him 
out of the synagogue: 

?3 On this account said his parents, He hath 
entered on his years, ask him. 

** And they called the second time the man who 
had been blind, and said to him, Glorify Aloha: 
for we know that this man is a sinner. 

*° He answered and said to them, Whether he 
be a sinner, | Know not; but one (thing) | know, 
that | have been blind, and now, behold, | see. 
6 They say to him again, What did he to thee? 
How opened he to thee thine eyes? 

?7 He saith to them, | told you, and you heard 
not: what will you hear? Are you also willing 
disciples to him to become? 

?8 But they reviled him, and said to him, Thou 
art the disciple of him; but we are the disciples of 
Musha. 

*° And we know that with Musha Aloha spake; 
but for this, we know not whence he is. 
°° Answered the man and said to them, At this 
then we must wonder, that you know not from 
whence he is, and (yet) mine eyes he hath 
opened! 

3! But we know that Aloha the voice of sinners 
heareth not; but if any man fear him and do his 
will, him he heareth. 

32 From of old it hath not been heard that a man 
hath opened the eyes of one born blind. 

If this were not from Aloha, he could not this 
have done. 

They answered and say to him, Thou 

altogether wast born in sins, and art thou 
teaching us? And they cast him without. 
35 Jeshu heard that they had cast him without, 
and he found him, and said to him, Dost thou 
believe on the Son of Aloha? 

°° He who had been cured answered and said, 
Who (is he), my Lord, that | may believe in him? 

37 Jeshu said to him, Thou hast seen him, and 
He who talketh with thee is He. 


38 He said, | believe, my Lord! And, falling, he 
adored him. 

°° Jeshu said to them, For the judgment of this 
world am | come, that they who see not may 
see, and they who see may be made blind. 

“° And some of the Pharishee who were with 
him heard these (words), and they said to him, 
Are we blind also? 

“' Jeshu saith to them, If blind you were, you 
would have no sin; but now you say, We see: 
therefore your sin is confirmed. 


10:1 Amen, amen, | say to you, Whosoever 
entereth not by the door into the fold of the flock, 
but ascendeth by another place, he is a thief and 
a robber. 

? But he who entereth by the door, he is the 
shepherd of the flock. 

3 And to him the keeper of the gate openeth the 
gate, and the flock heareth his voice, and his 
sheep he calleth by their names, and he leadeth 
them forth; 

“ And when his flock hath gone forth, he goeth 
before it, and his sheep follow him, because 
they know his voice. 

° But after a stranger the flock goeth not, but it 
fleeth from him; for it knoweth not the voice of a 
stranger. 

ê This parable spake Jeshu to them, but they 
knew not what he said with them. 

7 Jeshu saith to them again, Amen, amen, | say 
to you, | am the gate of the flock; 

8 And all those who have come were thieves 
and robbers, but the flock heard them not. 

? | am the gate; by me if any man enter, he shall 
live and shall come in, and go out, and find 
pasture. 

10 The thief cometh not but to steal and to kill 
and destroy: |am come that they may have life, 
and that which is more. 

"lam the good shepherd, and the good 
shepherd his life layeth down for his flock. 

? The hireling who is not the shepherd, and 
whose the sheep are not, when he seeth the 
wolf coming, leaveth the flock and fleeth; and 
the wolf cometh ravaging and destroying the 
flock. 

13 But the hireling fleeth because he is an 
hireling, and careth not for the flock. 

41am the good shepherd, and know my own, 
and am known of my own. 

15 As my Father knoweth me (and) I know my 
Father, and my life | lay down for the flock. 

16 But | have other sheep also which are not of 
this fold; and these also it behoveth me to bring, 


and they will hear my voice, and all shall 
become one flock and one shepherd. 

17 On this account my Father loveth me, 
because | lay down my life again to take it. 

18 No man taketh it away from me, but I lay it 
down from my will; for I am able to lay it down, 
and | am able to take it again; for this 
commandment have | received from my Father. 
19 And there was again a division among the 
Jinudoyee because of his words: 

2 And many of them said, He has a devil, and 
is altogether insane,” why do you hear him? 

?1 But others said, These words are not of a 
demoniac: how can a devil open the eyes of the 
blind? 

*? It was the feast of the renovation at Urishlem, 
and it was winter. 

?3 And Jeshu walked in the temple in the portico 
of Shelumun. 

4 And the Jihudoyee surrounded him, saying to 
him, How long takest thou our souls? If thou art 
the Meshicha, tell us openly. 

Jeshu answered and said to them, | have told 
you, and you believe not. The works that | do in 
the name of my Father, these witness for me. 
°° But you believe not, because you are not of 
my sheep, (even) as | told you. 

*/ My sheep hear my voice, and | know them, 
and they follow me; 

*8 And | give to them the life which is eternal, 
and they shall not perish for ever, and no man 
shall snatch them from my hands. 

*° For my Father who gave them to me than all 
is greater; and no man from the hand of my 
Father can snatch them. 

°° | and my Father are One. 

31 And again the Jihudoyee took up stones to 
stone him. 

32 Jeshu saith to them, Many good works from 
my Father have | showed you: on account of 
which of these works do you stone me? 

33 The Jihudoyee say to him, Not on account of 
the good works do we stone thee, but because 
thou blasphemest; thou, being a son of man, 
making thyself Aloha. 

Jeshu saith to them, Is it not written in your 
law, | said, Ye are Alohee? 

35 If them he calleth Alohee, because with them 
was the word of Aloha, and the scripture cannot 
be loosed, 

°° To him whom the Father hath sanctified and 
sent into the world, say you, Thou blasphemest, 
because | have said to you, | am the Son of 
Aloha? 


34 John 10:20 - Meshno sheno: See Thes. ii. 16 


37 And if | do not the works of my Father, 

believe me not; 

38 But if | do, though you believe not me, the 

works believe, that you may know and believe 

that the Father is in me, and (that) | (am) in the 

Father. 

°° And they sought again to apprehend him; but 

he went forth from among their hands: 

“° And he went beyond Jurdan, to the place 

where Juchanon at first had baptized, and was 

there. 

4 And many came to him, and said, Juchanon 

did not one sign; but every thing which 

Juchanon said concerning this man was true. 
And many believed in him. 


11:1 But a certain man was sick, Loozar, of the 
village Bethania: (he was) the brother of Mariam 
and of Martha. 

It was that Mariam who anointed with balsam 
the feet of Jeshu, and wiped (them) with her 
hair, whose brother this Loozar was who was 
sick. 

3 And his two sisters sent unto Jeshu, saying, 
Our Lord, he whom thou lovest is sick. 

“ But Jeshu said, This sickness is not of death, 
but for the glory of Aloha, that the Son of Aloha 
may be glorified on account of it. 

° But Jeshu loved Martha and Mariam and 
Loozar. 

ê And when he heard that he was sick, he 
remained in the place where he was two days. 

7 And afterwards he saith to his disciples, 
Come, we will go again into Jihud. 

è His disciples say to him, Raban, now have the 
Jinudoyee sought to stone thee; and again goest 
thou thither? 

? Jeshu saith to them, Are there not twelve 
hours in the day? If a man walk in the day, he 
stumbleth not, because he seeth the light of this 
world; 

1° But if a man walk in the night, he stumbleth, 
because no light is in him. 

These spake Jeshu; and afterwards he said 
to them, Loozar our friend reposeth;”* but | go 
to awake him. 

12 His disciples say to him, Our Lord, if he 
sleep” he is healed. 

13 But Jeshu spake concerning his death; and 
they thought that concerning the repose of sleep 
he spake. 

14 Then said Jeshu to them explicatively,-°” 
Loozar is dead. 

25 John 11:11 - Shokeb, lieth down, reclineth 


8 John 11:12 - Domek, sleepeth 


15 And | am glad | was not there for your sakes, 
that you may believe. But let us walk thither. 

1€ Thoma, who is called the Twin, saith to his 
fellow-disciples, Let us also go, that we may die 
with him. 

And Jeshu came to Bethania, and found that 
he had been four days in the house of burial. 

18 Now Bethania was nigh to Urishlem, being a 
distance from it of about fifteen stadia. 

13 And many of the Jihudoyee had come to 
Martha and Mariam, that they might speak to 
their hearts”? concerning their brother. 

2 Then Martha, when she heard that Jeshu had 
come, went forth to meet him; but Mariam sat in 
the house. 

?1 And Martha said to Jeshu, My Lord, if thou 
hadst been here, my brother had not died. 

?? But even now know | that whatsoever thou 
wilt ask of Aloha, he giveth to thee. 

3 Jeshu saith to her, Thy brother ariseth. 

?4 Martha saith to him, | know that he ariseth in 
the resurrection at the last day. 

Jeshu saith to her, | am the Resurrection and 
the Life;*°? and (he) who believeth in me, 
although he will die, shall live. 

And every one who liveth and believeth in 
me, for ever shall not die. Believest thou this? 
*7 She saith to him, Yes, my Lord; | believe that 
thou art the Meshicha, the Son of Aloha, who 
cometh into the world. 

?8 And when she had said these, she went, 
called Mariam her sister in secret, and said to 
her, Our Master hath come, and calleth for thee. 
?° When Mariam heard, she arose quickly, and 
came to him. 

°° But Jeshu himself had not yet come into the 
village, but was in that place where Martha met 
him. 

31 But those Jihudoyee who were also with her 
in the house to console her, when they saw that 
Mariam rose up hastily to go forth, went 
themselves after her; for they thought that to the 
sepulchre she went to weep. 

But she, Mariam, when she was come where 
Jeshu was, and saw him, fell down at his feet, 
saying, If thou hadst been here, my Lord, my 
brother had not died. 

33 But Jeshu, when he saw her weeping, and 
those Jihudoyee who came with her weeping, he 
was moved in his spirit, and was troubled, 


27 John 11:14 - Phashikith 


John 11:19 - Da-nemlun belebheen 
John 11:25 - Eno-no Nuchoma Vachayee, 
commonly rendered, "the consolation" 


258 
259 


%4 And said, Where have you laid him? And they 
said to him, Our Lord, come and see. 

3 And the tears of Jeshu came. 

°° And the Jihudoyee said, See how he loved 
him! 

3 But some of them said, Could not this who 
opened the eyes of that blind have caused also 
that this should not have died? 

38 Jeshu, groaning within himself, came to the 
house of burial; and that house of burial was a 
cave, and a stone was laid at the gate of it. 

3° And Jeshu said, Take up this stone. Martha, 
the sister of him (who was) dead, saith to him, 
My Lord, he now stinketh; for four days are to 
him. 

“° Jeshu said to her, Said | not to thee, that if 
thou wilt believe, thou shalt see the glory of 
Aloha? 

# And they took up the stone. And Jeshu lifted 
his eye upward, and said, Father, | give thanks 
to thee that thou hast heard me; 

And | know that at all times thou hearest me: 
yet, because of this assembly which standeth, | 
say these (words), that they may believe that 
thou hast sent me. 

And when he had said these (words), he 
cried with a high voice, Loozar, come without! 
“* And he, the dead, came forth, his hands and 
his feet being bound with bandages, and his 
face in a linen cloth. Jeshu saith to them, 
Release him, and let (him) go. 

45 And many of the Jihudoyee who came with 
Mariam, when they saw the thing which Jeshu 
did, believed on him. 

“6 And some of them went to the Pharishee, and 
told them every thing that Jeshu had done. 

47 And the chief priests and Pharishee 
assembled, and said, What shall we do? 
Because this man doeth many signs; 

“8 And if we leave him thus, all men will believe 
on him, and the Rumoyee, coming, take away 
our country and our people. 

? But one of them, whose name was Kaiapha, 
was the high priest of that year; and he said to 
them, You know not any thing, 

Nor reason that it is expedient for us that one 
man die for the people, and not all the people 
perish. 

51 But this from himself he spake not, but 
because he was high priest of that year, he 
prophesied that Jeshu should die for the people, 
52 And not only for (that) people, but also that 
the children of Aloha who are dispersed he 
should gather into one. 

°8 And from that day they determined to kill him. 


54 But Jeshu himself walked not openly among 
the Jinudoyee, but went from thence to the 
region near the wilderness, to a region which 
was called Ephrem, and there conversed with 
his disciples. 

°° Now the petscha of the Jinudoyee drew nigh; 
and many went up from the country places to 
Urishlem before the festival, to purify 
themselves. 

°° And they sought for Jeshu, and said one to 
another in the temple, What think you, that he 
cometh to the feast? 

°” But the chief priests and Pharishee had 
commanded that if any man knew where (he 
was), he should declare it to them, as that they 
might apprehend him. 


12:1 But Jeshu six days before the petscha 
came to Bethania, where Loozar was, he whom 
Jeshu had raised from among the dead. 
? And they made him there a supper and Martha 
served, and Loozar was one of those who 
reclined with him. 
° But Mariam took a vase of balsam of the finest 
nard, great in price, and anointed the feet of 
Jeshu, and wiped with her hair his feet, and the 
house was filled with the fragrance of the 
balsam. 
* And Jihuda Scarjuta, one of his disciples, he 
who would betray him said, 
° Why was not this ointment sold for three 
hundred dinoreen, and given to the poor? 
ê But this he said, not because for the poor he 
had care, but because he was a thief, and the 
purse was with him, and whatever fell into it he 
carried. 
’ But Jeshu said, Let her alone. For the day of 
my burial had she kept it. 
ê In all time the poor you have with you; but me 
you have not at all time. 
* And a great company of Jihudoyee who were 
there heard Jeshu. And they had come not on 
Jeshu’s account only, but also to see Loozar, he 
whom he had raised from among the dead. 
10 But the chief priests were minded to slay 
Loozar also, 

Because many of the Jinudoyee on account 
of him had gone and believed in Jeshu. 
The day after, a great gathering of those who 
had come to the feast, when they heard that 
Jeshu was coming to Urishlem, 
13 Took branches of palms, and went forth to 
meet him. And they cried out, saying, Aushana! 


7° John 12:1 - Or, (men beth mithee,) from the house 


of the dead 


Blessed is he who cometh in the name of the 
Lorpb, the King of Israel. 

14 And Jeshu caused to be found an ass, and 
sat upon him; as it is written, 

15 Fear not, daughter of Tseun: behold, thy King 
cometh to thee, and riding on a colt, the foal of 
an ass. 

16 But these the disciples knew not at that time; 
but when Jeshu was glorified, the disciples 
remembered that these were written concerning 
him, and (that) these (things) they had done 
unto him. 

17 But the assembly that was with him when he 
called Loozar from the sepulchre, and raised 
him from among the dead, bare witness. 

è And on account of this, great multitudes went 
forth to receive him; for they had heard that this 
sign he had done. 

19 But the Pharishee said one to another, See 
you that you do not profit any thing! For, behold, 
the whole world is gone after him. 

Now there were also from the Gentiles men 
who had ascended to worship at the feast. 

These came and drew near to Philipos, who 
was of Beth-tsaida of Galila; and they requested 
of him, and said to him, Mari, we desire to see 
Jeshu. 

2 And Philipos came and told Andreas, and 
Andreas and Philipos told Jeshu. 

?3 But Jeshu answered and said to them, The 
hour hath come that the Son of man may be 
glorified. 

Amen, amen, I say to you, That a grain of 
wheat if it fall not and die in the earth remaineth 
alone; but if it die, it bringeth much fruits. 

*° He who loveth his life shall lose it; and he 
who hateth his life in this world shall keep it to 
the life which is eternal. 

*° If any man serve me, let him come after me; 
and where | am, there shall be also my servant: 
whoever serveth me, him will my Father honour. 
“7 Now my soul, behold it is commoved; and 
what shall | say? My Father, deliver me from this 
hour: but on account of this have | come unto 
this hour. 

?8 Father, glorify thy name. And the voice was 
heard from heaven, | have glorified, and again | 

lorify.7°" 

? And the company who stood, heard, and they 
said there was thunder But others said, An angel 
spake with him.. 

° Jeshu answered and said to them, Not on my 
account was this voice, but on your account. 


761 John 12:28 - Schabechth, vatoob maschbach-no 


31 Now is the judgment of this world; now is the 
ruler of this world cast out. 

32 And I, when | have been lifted up from the 
earth, will draw all men unto me. 

33 But this he said to show by what death he 
should die. 

34 The people said to him, We have heard from 
the law that the Meshicha for ever abideth: how 
sayest thou that the Son of man is to be lifted 
up? Who is this Son of man? 

°° Jeshu saith to them, A little further time is the 
light with you. Walk while you have the light, that 
the darkness overtake you not. And whoever 
walketh in darkness knoweth not whither he 
goeth. l l l 

While you have the light, believe in the light, 
that the sons of light you may become. These 
spake Jeshu, and went (and) concealed himself 
from them. 

37 Yet though all these signs he had done 
before them, they believed not in him: 

38 That the word of the prophet Eshaia might be 
fulfilled, who said, My Lord, who hath believed 
our report,” And the arm of the Lorp, to whom 
hath it been revealed? 

Because of this they were not able to believe: 
Wherefore again Eshaia had said, 

“° He hath blinded their eyes, And darkened 
their heart, That they should not see with their 
eyes, And understand with their heart, And be 
turned, and | should heal them. 
“' These said Eshaia when he saw his glory, 
and spake concerning him. 
42 Yet of the chiefs also many believed in him: 
but because of the Pharishee they did not 
confess, that they might not be put out of the 
synagogue: 
° For they loved the glory of men more than the 
glory of Aloha. 
“* But Jeshu cried and said, He who believeth in 
me, believeth not in me, but in him who sent me. 
° And he who seeth me seeth him who sent 
me. 
“6 | the light am come into the world, that every 
one who believeth in me might not abide in 
darkness. 
47 And he who heareth my words, and doth not 
keep them, | judge him not: for | came not to 
judge the world, but to save the world. 

He who rejecteth me, and receiveth not my 
word, hath that which judgeth him: the word 
which | speak, that judgeth him in the last day. 
* For | of myself have not spoken, but the 
Father who sent me, he gave me a 


22 John 12:38 - Or, our hearing 


commandment, what | should say, and what | 
should speak. 

°° And | know that his commandments are life 
everlasting: these therefore which | speak, as 
said to me my Father, so | speak. 


13:1 Now before the feast of petscha, Jeshu 
knew that his hour was come, and that he 
should pass from this world unto his Father, and 
he had loved his who were in this world, and 
unto the end he had loved them. 

? And when was the supper, Satana had cast it 
into the heart of Jinuda bar Shemun Scarjuta to 
betray him. 

° But Jeshu himself, because he knew that the 
Father had given all things into his hands, and 
that from Aloha he had come forth, and unto 
Aloha he was going, 

Riseth from supper, and setteth his garments 
apart, and took a towel, (and) bound (it) upon his 
loins; 

° And he poured water into a basin, and began 
to wash the feet of his disciples, and wiped 
(them) with the towel that he had bound upon 
his loins. 

ê But when he came to Shemun Kipha, Shemun 
said to him, Dost thou, my Lord, wash my feet 
for me? 

7 Jeshu answered and said to him, What | do, 
thou knowest not now; but afterward thou shalt 
know. 
® Shemun Kipha saith to him, Never shalt thou 
wash for me my feet Jeshu saith to him, If | do 
not wash thee, thou hast with me no part.. 

? Shemun Kipha saith to him, Then, my Lord, 
not only my feet shalt thou wash for me, but also 
my hands, also my head. 

1° Jeshu saith, He that hath bathed needeth not 
but his feet only to wash, for all of him he hath 
cleansed: also you are clean, but not all of you. 

" For Jeshu knew who was betraying him; 
therefore he said, Ye are not all of you clean. 

But when he had washed their feet, he took 
up his garments and reclined, and said to them, 

Know you what | have done for you? 

13 You call me Our Master, and Our Lord; and 
well say you, for | am. 

14 If I then, your Lord and your Master, have 
washed for you your feet, how much more ought 
you to wash the feet of one another? 

15 For this pattern have I given you, that as | 
have done to you, you also should do. 

16€ Amen, amen, | say to you, The servant is not 
greater than his lord; nor (is) the apostle greater 
than he who sent him. 


17 If these you know, happy are you if you do 
them. 

18 Not of all of you do | speak; for | know those 
whom | have chosen; but that the scripture might 
be fulfilled, that he who eateth bread with me 
hath lifted against me his heel. 

19 Now | tell you before it shall be, that when it is 
done you may believe that | am. 

2 Amen, amen, | say to you, Whoever receiveth 
him whom I send receiveth me; and whoever 
receiveth me receiveth him who sent me. 

?1 These said Jeshu, and was agitated in his 
spirit, and testified, and said, Amen, amen, | say 
to you, That one of you shall betray me. 

?? But the disciples looked one on the other, 
because they knew not concerning whom he 
spake. 

3 Now there was of his disciples one who 
reclined on his bosom; he whom Jeshu loved. 

“To this signed Shemun Kipha that he would 
ask of whom it was that he spake. 

?5 And that disciple fell upon the bosom of 
Jeshu, and said to him, My Lord, who is this? 

Jeshu answered and said to him, He to whom 

I give the dipped bread. And Jeshu dipped the 
bread and gave it to Jinuda bar Shemun 
Scarjuta. 

*” Then after the bread Satana entered into him. 
And Jeshu said to him, What thou doest, do with 
speed! 

è But this no man knew of those who reclined 
of what he spake to him. 

*° For some of them thought that as Jihuda had 
the purse, he had instructed him to buy 
something that should be required at the feast, 
or that he should give somewhat to the poor. 

°° But he, Jihuda, received the bread and 
immediately went out: and it was night when he 
went out. 

31 And Jeshu said, Now is glorified the Son of 
man, and Aloha is glorified in him. 

%2? And if Aloha is glorified in him, Aloha shall 
glorify him in himself, and at once doth glorify 
him. 

33 My sons, a little longer | am with you, and you 
will seek me; and, as | said to the Jinudoyee, 
Whither | go you cannot come, so to you say | 
now. 

34 A new commandment give | to you, that you 
should love one another; as | have loved you, so 
do you also love one another. 

35 By this shall all men know that you are my 
disciples, if love be in you one for another. 

38 Shemun Kipha said to him, Our Lord, whither 
goest thou? Jeshu said to him, Whither | go, 


thou canst not now come after me; but at the 
last thou shalt come. 

37 Shemun Kipha saith to him, My Lord, why 
cannot | come after thee now? My life for thee 
lay | down. 

°° Jeshu saith to him, Dost thou lay down thy life 
for me! Amen, amen, | tell thee, That the cock 
will not crow, until thou shalt have denied me 
three times. 


14:1 Let not your heart be troubled: believe in 
Aloha, and in me believe. 

* Many are the mansions of my Father’s house: 
and if not, | would have told you; for | go to 
prepare for you a place. 

3 And if | go to prepare for you a place, | will 
come again and take you with me, that where | 
am you also may be. 

4 And whither | go you know, and the way you 
know. 

° Thoma saith to him, Our Lord, we know not 
whither thou goest, and how can we know the 
way? 

ê Jeshu saith to him, | (am) the way, and the 
truth, and the life. 

No man cometh unto my Father unless by me. 
But if me you had known, my Father also would 
you have known: and henceforth you know him 
and have seen him. 

è Philipos saith to him, Our Lord, show us the 
Father, and it sufficeth us. 

° Jeshu saith to him, All this time have | been 
with you, and hast thou not known me, Philipé? 
He who me seeth, seeth the Father; and how 
sayest thou, Show us the Father? 

1° Believest thou not that | am in my Father and 
my Father in me? And these words that | speak, 
| speak not from myself, but my Father who 
dwelleth in me, he doeth these works. 

1 Believe that | am in my Father and my Father 
in me; and if not, even on account of the works, 
believe. 

Amen, amen, | say to you, That whosoever 
believeth in me, these works that | do shall he 
do also; and more than these shall he do, 
because | go unto my Father. 

And whatsoever you shall ask in my name, | 
will do for you, that the Father may be glorified in 
his Son. 

14 And if you shall ask (of) me in my name, | will 
do. 

15 If you love me, keep my commandments; 


'© and | will pray of my Father, and another 
Paraclete*® will he give you, who will be with 
you for ever, 

17 the Spirit of truth, he whom the world cannot 
receive, because it doth not see him, nor know 
him. But you know him; for with you he dwelleth, 
and in you is. 

18 | will not leave you orphans; for | will come to 
you a little after. 

19 And the world seeth me not, but you shall see 
me; for because | live, you also shall live. 

20 In that day you will know that | am in my 
Father, and you in me, and | in you. 

?1 He who hath my commandments and 
keepeth them is he who loveth me; and he who 
loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and | will 
love him, and will manifest to him myself. 

* Jihuda saith to him, (it was not Scarjuta,) My 
Lord, how to us wilt thou manifest thyself, and 
not to the world? 

3 Jeshu replied, and said to him, He who loveth 
me, my word keepeth, and my Father will love 
him, and unto him we come, and a dwelling- 
place”®* with him we make. 

*4 But he who loveth me not, keepeth not my 
word. And the word that you hear is not mine, 
but of the Father who sent me. 

*° These have | spoken with you while | am with 
you. 

? But he, the Paraclete, the Spirit of Holiness, 
whom the Father sendeth in my name, he shall 
teach you every thing, and he shall remind you 
of all that | have said to you. 

? Peace | leave with you; my peace | give to 
you: not as the world giveth, give | unto you. Let 
not your heart be troubled, nor be afraid. 

?8 You have heard what | have told you, that | 
go, and come to you (again). If you had loved 
me, you would have rejoiced, because | go to 
my Father; for my Father is greater than I. 

*° And now, behold, | have told you while it is 
not done, that when it has been you may 
believe. 

°° Henceforth | will not speak with you much; for 
the ruler of the world cometh, and in me hath he 
nothing. 

31 But that the world may know that I love my 
Father, and as my Father hath commanded, so | 
do. Arise, let us go hence! 


15:1 | am the true vine,*~ and my Father is the 
husbandman. 

283 John 14:16 - Paraklito 

John 14:23 —A mansion 
John 15:1 - The vine of truth 


264 
265 


* Every branch which in me giveth not fruits he 
taketh away; and that which giveth fruits he 
cleanseth, that more fruits it may give. 

3 Now are you clean because of the word which 
| have spoken with you. 

* Abide in me, and | in you. As the branch 
cannot give fruits of itself if it abide not in the 
vine, so also cannot you, if you abide not in me. 
5 | am the vine, and you the branches. Whoso 
abideth in me, and | in him, this produceth much 
fruits, because without me you cannot do any 
thing. 

ê But if a man abide not in me, he is cast 
without, as a withered branch; and, gathering, 
they cast it into the fire to burn. 

’ But if you abide in me, and my words abide in 
you, all whatever you will to ask shall be unto 
you. 

ê In this is glorified my Father, that much fruit 
you give, and be my disciples. 

As my Father hath loved me, so | have loved 
you: continue in the love of me. 

If my commandments you will keep, you shall 
abide in my love; as | have kept the 
commandments of my Father, and abide in his 
love. 

" These have | spoken with you, that my joy 
may be in you, and that your joy may be full. 

12 This is my commandment, That you love one 
another, as | have loved you. 

13 Love which is greater than this is not, that a 
man lay down his life for his friends. 

14 You are my friends, if you do all that | 
command you. 

15 No more | call you servants, for the servant 
knoweth not what doeth his Lord; but my friends 
have | called you; wherefore all that | have heard 
from my Father, | have made known unto you. 

ê You have not chosen me, but | have chosen 
you, and placed you, that you also may go (and) 
yield much fruit; and your fruit shall remain, 
because all that you shall ask the Father in my 
name, he will give to you. 

These | command you, That you love one 
another. 

18 And if the world hate you, know that, before 
you, it hated me. 

19 And if of the world you were, the world its 
own would have loved; but you are not of the 
world, for | have chosen you from the world; on 
which account the world hateth you. 

20 Remember the word which | spake with you, 
That there is no servant who is greater than his 
lord. If me they have persecuted, you also will 
they persecute; and if my word they had kept, 
yours also would they keep. 


=" But these all will they do to you on account of 
my name, because they know not Him who sent 
me. 

?2 If had not come and spoken with them, they 
had not had sin; but now have they no pretext 
for their sins.7©° 

?3 He who hateth me, my Father also hateth. 

24 And if the works | had not done before their 
eyes which no other man hath done, they had 
not had sin; but now they have seen and hated 
both me and my Father;*°” 
?5 that the word may be fulfilled which is written 
in their law, They hated me undeservedly. 

2 But when the Paraclete cometh, He whom | 
will send unto you from my Father, the Spirit of 
Truth, He who from my Father cometh forth, He 
shall testify of me. 

?7 You also testify, because from the beginning 
are you with me. 


16:1 These have | spoken with you, that you 
may not be offended. 

They shall cast you out from their synagogues; 
and the hour cometh when every one who shall 
kill you will think that a sacrifice he offereth unto 
Aloha. 

3 And these will they do, because they have not 
known either my Father or me. 

“ These have | spoken with you, that when their 
time hath come you may remember that | told 
you. But these at first | did not tell you, because 
with you I was. 

° But now | go unto Him who sent me; and no 
man of you asketh me, Whither goest thou? 

ê For I have told you these, and sorrow hath 
come and filled your hearts. 

’ But | the truth say to you, That it is needful for 
you that I go; for if | go not, the Paraclete 
cometh not to you. But if | go, | will send him to 
you. 

è And when he hath come, he will convict the 
world of sin, and of righteousness, and of 
judgment. 

Of sin, because they believe not in me; 

10 but of righteousness, because unto my 
Father | go, and you see me not again; 

"' but of judgment, because the ruler of this 
world is judged. 

12 I have yet much to tell you, but you cannot 
now apprehend; 

13 but when the Spirit of Truth hath come, he will 
lead you into all the truth; for he will not speak of 


76° John 15:22 - Or, no cause on the faces of their sins 


787 John 15:24 - Also me, and also my Father 


himself; but all that he shall hear he will 
speak, and the things to come~” will he make 
known to you. 

14 He will glorify me, because of mine he will 
take and will show you. 

15 All whatever that the Father hath is mine: on 
this account | have said to you, That of mine he 
will take, and will show you. 

16 A little (time), and you will not see me; and 
again a little, and you shall see me, because | 
go to the Father. 

17 And the disciples said one to another, What is 
this that he saith to us? A little (time), and you 
will not see me; and again a little (while), and 
you shall see me, and because | go to my 
Father. 

18 And they said, What is this little (time of) 
which he hath spoken? We know not what he 
saith. 

19 But Jeshu knew that they sought to ask him; 
and he said to them, Concerning this do you 
inquire together that | told you, A little (time), and 
you will not see me; and again a little, and you 
shall see me? 

Amen, amen, | tell you, That you will weep 
and lament, and the world will rejoice; and to 
you shall be sorrow; but your sorrow shall 
become joy. 

A woman, when she travaileth, hath sorrow, 
that the day hath come for her giving birth; but 
when she hath borne a son, she remembereth 
not her anguish, for joy that a child of man hath 
been born into the world. 

2 You also now have sorrow; but again | will 
see you, and your heart shall rejoice, and your 
joy no man taketh from you. 

*° And in that day you will ask me nothing. 
Amen, amen, | tell you, That whatsoever you 
shall ask my Father in my name, he will give 
you. 

** Hitherto you have not asked any thing in my 
name: ask, and receive, that your joy may be 
full. 

*° These in parables | have spoken with you; 
but the hour cometh when | will not speak with 
you in parables, but manifestly; and | will 
announce to you concerning the Father. 

6 In that day you shall ask in my name; and | 
say not to you that | will ask of the Father for 
you, 


268 John 16:13a - From his own mind 


John 16:13b - The futurities 
John 16:24 - Some copies add here, Velo medem, 
“and not any thing” 


269 
270 


?7 for the Father” himself loveth you, because 
you have loved me, and have believed that from 
the Father | came forth. 

?8 | came forth from the Father, and came into 
the world; and again | leave the world, and go 
unto the Father. 

*° His disciples say to him, Behold, now openly 
speakest thou, and not one parable hast thou 
spoken. 

° Now know we that every thing thou knowest, 
and thou needest not that any man should ask 
thee. By this we believe that from Aloha thou 
hast come forth. 

31 Jeshu saith to them, Believe! 

32 Behold, the hour shall come, and now 
cometh, that you will be dispersed (every) man 
to his place, and you will have left me alone. But 
| am not alone, because the Father is with me. 
33 These have | said to you, that in me you may 
have peace. In the world you shall have distress; 
but be of heart, | have conquered the world. 


17:1 These spake Jeshu; and, uplifting his eyes 
to heaven, he said, My Father, the hour hath 
come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son may glorify 
thee. 

? As thou hast given him power over all flesh, 
that to all whom thou hast given him he should 
give the life which is eternal. 

But this is the life which is eternal, that they 
know thee, who art the true Aloha,” and Him 
whom thou hast sent, Jeshu Meshicha. 

“| have glorified thee on the earth; the work 
which thou didst give me to do, | have finished it. 
° And now glorify thou me, my Father, with 
thyself, in that glory which | had with thee before 
the world was. 

ê | have made known thy name unto the sons of 
man; those whom thou gavest me from the 
world: thine they were, and to me didst thou give 
them; and they have kept thy word. 

7 Now have they known that whatsoever thou 
hast given me is from thee. 

è And the words that thou gavest me | have 
given them, and they have received, and have 
known assuredly that from thee | came forth, 
and have believed that thou didst send me. 

* And for them | pray; not for the world | pray, 
but for them whom thou hast given me, because 
they are thine. 

10 And every thing of mine is thine, and thine is 
mine, and | am glorified in them. 


271 John 16:27 — Western Peshitto has “Aloha” 


272 John 17:3 - The Aloha of truth 


1! Henceforth | am not in the world; but these 
are in the world, and | come to thee. Holy 
Father, keep them through thy name, that 
(name) which thou hast given to me, that they 
may he one as we are. 

12? While | was with them in the world, | kept 
them through thy name: those whom thou 
gavest me | have kept, and a man of them is not 
lost, but the son of perdition, that the scripture 
may be fulfilled. 

13 But now | come to thee, and these (things) | 
speak in the world, that they may have my joy 
completed in themselves. 

| have given them thy word, and the world 
hath hated them, because they are not of the 
world, as | am not of the world. 

15 Not that thou wouldest take them out of the 
world do | pray, but that thou wouldest keep 
them from the evil; 

for they are not of the world, even as | am not 
of the world. 

17 Father, sanctify them through thy truth; for thy 
word is truth. 

As me thou hast sent into the world, | also 
have sent them into the world. 

193 And for their sakes | consecrate myself, that 
they also may be consecrated for the truth. 

20 Nor for these do | pray only, but also for those 
who shall believe in me through their word; 

*' that they all may be one, as thou, my Father, 
(art) in me, and I in thee, that they also in us one 
may be; that the world may believe that thou 
hast sent me. 

2 And the glory which thou hast given me have 
I given unto them, that they may be one as we 
are one; 

?3 | in them, and thou in me, that they may be 
perfected in one; and that the world may know 
that thou hast sent me, and that thou hast loved 
them, as me also thou hast loved. 

** Father, those whom thou hast given | will that 
where | am they also may be with me, that they 
may see that glory of mine, which thou hast 
given to me; for thou lovedst me before the 
foundations of the world. 

° My righteous Father, the world hath not 
known thee; but | have known thee, and these 
have known that thou hast sent me. 

%8 And | have made known unto them thy name, 
and | make it known that the love itself, 
wherewith thou hast loved me, may be in them, 
and | may be in them. 


18:1 These said Jeshu, and went forth with his 
disciples over the ford of Kedrun, where there 


was a garden, which he entered with his 
disciples. 

? But Jihuda, the traitor, also knew that place, 
because many-a-time had Jeshu there with his 
disciples convened. 

3 Jihuda then took a band, and from the chief 
priests and Pharishee he took officers, and 
came thither with lanterns and lamps and arms. 
“ But Jeshu, who knew every thing that should 
come upon him, went forth and said to them, 
Whom seek you? 

° They say to him, Jeshu Natsroia. Jeshu saith 
to them, | am. And Jihuda the traitor was also 
standing with them. 

ê And when Jeshu had said to them, | am, they 
went backward and fell upon the ground. 

7 And Jeshu again asked them, Whom seek 
you? Then they said, Jeshu Natsroia. 

è Jeshu saith to them, | have told you that | am; 
and if me you seek, let these go. 

* That the word might be fulfilled which he 
spake, Of those whom thou hast given me | 
have not lost even one. 

1 But Shemun Kipha had a sword upon him, 
and he drew it, and smote the servant of the 
high priest, and took off his right ear. And the 
name of the servant was Molek. 

11 Jeshu said to Kipha, Put up the sword into its 
sheath; the cup which my Father hath given me 
shall | not drink it? 

12 Then the band and the captains and the 
officials of the Jinudoyee took Jeshu and bound 
him, 

13 and brought him unto Chanan first, because 
he was father-in-law of Kaiapha, he who was the 
high priest of that year. 

14 Now it was Kaiapha, he, who had counselled 
the Jinudoyee that it was expedient that one 
man should die for the people. 

15 But Shemun Kipha, and one of the other 
disciples, came after Jeshu. And that disciple 
knew the chief of the priests, and went in with 
Jeshu into the hall. 

But Shemun stood without at the door. And 
that other disciple, who knew the chief of the 
priests, went out and told the keeper of the door 
to admit Shemun. 

17 But the damsel keeping the door said to 
Shemun, Art thou also of the disciples of this 
man? He saith to her, No. 

18 And the servants and officials were standing, 
and they had set a fire to warm them, because it 
was cold; and Shemun stood also with them and 
warmed himself. 


19 And the high priest questioned Jeshu 
concerning his disciples, and concerning his 
doctrine. 

20 And Jeshu said to him, | openly discoursed 
with the people, and, at all time, taught in the 
synagogue and in the temple, where all the 
Jihudoyee assemble. And nothing in secret have 
| spoken. 

21 Why askest thou me? Ask them who have 
heard what | have said with them. Behold, they 
know every thing that | have said. 

22 And as these (words) he spake, one of the 
officers who stood (by) struck Jeshu upon his 
cheek, and said to him, Thus givest thou the 
answer to the chief of the priests? 

?3 Jeshu replied and said to him, If wickedly | 
have spoken, bear witness of the evil; but if well, 
why hast thou struck me? 

** But Chanan had sent Jeshu bound unto 
Kaiapha, chief of the priests. 

*° And Shemun Kipha stood and warmed 
(himself), and they say to him, Thou art also one 
of his disciples? And he denied and said, | am 
not. 

%8 One of the servants of the chief of the priests 
said to him, the brother of him whose ear 
Shemun had cut off, Did not | see thee with him 
in the garden? 

*7 And again Shemun denied. And in the same 
hour the cock crowed. 

?8 Now they led Jeshu from Kaiapha into the 
praetorium, and it was early. But they would not 
enter the praetorium, that they might not be 
defiled, until they should have eaten the 
petscha. 

*° But Pilatos came forth to them without, and 
said to them, What accusation have you against 
this man? 
3p They answered and said to him, If he were 
not a worker of evils, we would not to thee have 
delivered him. 

31 Pilatos saith to them, Take you him, and 
judge him according to your law. The Jihudoyee 
say to him, It is not lawful for us to put any one 
to death. 

32 That the word that Jeshu spake might be 
accomplished, when he declared by what death 
he should die. 

33 But Pilatos entered the Praetorium, and 
called Jeshu, and said to him, Art thou the king 
of the Jihudoyee? 

34 Jeshu saith to him, Of thyself sayest thou 
this, or did others tell thee concerning me? 
°° Pilatos saith to him, Am | a Jihudoya? The 
sons of thy people and the chief priests have 
delivered thee to me: what hast thou done? 


°° Jeshu saith to him, My kingdom is not from 
this world. If from this world were my kingdom, 
my servants would have fought, that | should not 
have been delivered to the Jihudoyee. But now 
my kingdom is not from hence. 

3’ Pilatos saith to him, Then thou art a king? 
Jeshu saith to him, Thou hast said that |I am a 
king. For this am | born, and for this | came into 
the world, to testify of the truth. Every one who is 
of the truth heareth my voice. 

%8 Pilatos said to him, What is the truth? And 
when he had said this, he went forth again to the 
Jihudoyee, and said to them, | find not one 
cause in him. 

°° But you have a custom that one | should 
release to you at the petscha. Will you, 
therefore, that | release to you this King of the 
Jihudoyee? 

“° And they all cried and said, Not this, but Bar 
Aba. Now this Bar Aba was a robber. 


19:1 Then Pilatos scourged Jeshu. 

? And the soldiers entwined a crown of thorns, 
and set it on his head; and they covered him 
with robes of purple, 

3 and said, Hail to thee, King of the Jinudoyee! 
And struck him upon his cheeks. 

* And Pilatos came again forth, and said to 
them, Behold, | bring him to you forth, that you 
may know that I find nothing against him, nor 
one cause (of death). 

° And Jeshu came forth, having on him the 
crown of thorns and the robes of purple. And 
Pilatos said to them, Behold the man! 

ê But when the chief priests and officials saw 
him, they cried out, saying, Crucify him, crucify 
him!?’° Pilatos saith to them, Take you him and 
crucify him;?” for | find in him no cause. 

7 The Jihudoyee say to him, We have a law, 
and, according to our law, he is guilty of death, 
because he made himself the son of Aloha. 

ê When Pilatos heard that word, he the more 
feared. 

* And he entered again the praetorium, and said 
to Jeshu, Whence art thou? But Jeshu gave him 
no answer. 

10 Pilatos saith to him, With me speakest thou 
not? Knowest thou not that | have power to 
release thee, and power to crucify thee? 

11 Jeshu saith to him, Thou against me hast no 
power, no not any, unless it hath been given to 
thee from above: wherefore he who delivered 
me to thee hath a sin greater than thine. 


773 John 19:6a - Or, suspend him 


274 John 19:6b - elevate him on the cross 


12 On this account Pilatos willed to release him: 
but the Jihudoyee cried out, If this (man) thou 
releasest, thou art not the friend of Cesar: for 
whosoever maketh himself a king is the 
adversary of Cesar. 

13 But when Pilatos heard that word, he brought 
Jeshu without, and sat down upon the tribunal in 
the place which is called the Pavement of 
Stones, but in Hebrew it is called Gaphiphtha. 

14 And it was the preparation for the petscha. 
And it was about the sixth hour. And he said to 
the Jinudoyee, Behold your king! 

° But they cried out, Take him away, take him 
away! Crucify him,°” crucify him! Pilatos saith to 
them, Your king shall | crucify? The chief priests 
say to him, We have no king but Cesar. 

1€ Then delivered he him to them, that they 
might crucify him. And they took Jeshu, and led 
him forth, 

bearing his cross to a place which is called A 
Skull, but in Hebrew is Gogultha: 

18 there they crucified him, and with him two 
others, one on either side,“”° and Jeshu in the 
midst. 

19 And a tablet also wrote Pilatos, and set it on 
the cross; and it was thus written, This is Jeshu 
Natsroya, King of the Jinudoyee. 

20 And this title many of the Jinudoyee read; for 
nigh to the city was the place where Jeshu was 
crucified; and the writing was in Hebrew and 
Greek and Roman. 

?1 And the chief priests said to Pilatos, Do not 
write that he is king of the Jinudoyee, but that he 
said, | am the king of the Jihudoyee. 

22 Pilatos saith, That which | have written, | have 
written. 

?3 But the soldiers, when they had crucified 
Jeshu, took his vestments and made four parts, 
a part unto each one of the soldiers: but his tunic 
was without seam, from the top woven all of it. 
*4 And they said one to another, Let us not rend 
it, but play for it by playing,*”’ (to decide) whose 
it shall be: and fulfilled was the scripture which 
had said, They divided my garments among 
them, And upon my raiment did they cast the lot. 
These things did the soldiers. 

5 But there stood by the cross of Jeshu his 
mother, and the sister of his mother, and 
Mariam, she who was (the wife) of Cleopha, and 
Mariam Magdalitha. 


77° John 19:15 - Or, suspend him 


John 19:18 - Or, one here, and one here 
John 19:24 - Naphes eleh mephas 


276 
277 


°° Jeshu seeth his mother, and that disciple 
whom he loved, standing; and he said to his 
mother, Woman, behold thy son! di 

*7 and he said to that disciple, Behold thy 
mother!*”? And from that hour that disciple 
received her to be with him. 

?8 After these Jeshu knew that every thing 
would be accomplished, and, that the scripture 
might be fulfilled, said, | thirst.”° 

* And a vessel was set (there) filled with 
vinegar: then they filled a sponge from the 
vinegar, and put it upon hyssop, and offered it to 
his mouth. 

3 And when Jeshu had taken the vinegar, he 
said, Behold, it is finished!*°’ And he bowed his 
head, and delivered up his spirit. 

31 The Jinudoyee, because it was the 
preparation, said, Let not these bodies remain- 
all-night upon the cross, because the shabath 
has lighted: for a great day was the day of that 
shabath. And they besought of Pilatos that they 
should break the legs of those (who had been) 
crucified, and take them down. 

? And the soldiers came, and brake the legs of 
the first, and of that other who was crucified with 
him; 

33 but when they came unto Jeshu, they saw 
that he was dead already, and they brake not his 
legs. 

SP But one of the soldiers struck him in his side 
with the lance, and forthwith there came out 
blood and water. 
°° And he who saw testifieth, and the truth is his 
testimony; and he knoweth that the truth he hath 

said, that you also may believe. 
°° For these things were done, that the scripture 
might be fulfilled, which said, that A bone shall 
not be broken in him. 

37 And again another scripture which said, They 
shall look upon him whom they pierced. 

38 After these Jauseph, he who was of 
Rometha, begged of Pilatos, for he was a 
disciple of Jeshu, but secretly for fear of the 
Jihudoyee, that he might take the body of Jeshu: 
and Pilatos permitted. And he came and took 
the body of Jeshu. 

°° And Nikodimos also came, he who at first had 
come to Jeshu by night, and he brought with him 
a condiment of myrrh and aloes, as a hundred 
lithreen. 


278 John 19:26 - Athto, ho barek 


John 19:27 - Ho emok 
John 19:28 - Tshe-no 
John 19:30 - Ho Mashdlam 


279 
280 
281 


“° And they took the body of Jeshu, and 
wrapped it in cloths and in balsams, as is the 
manner of the Jinudoyee to bury. 

# Now in that place where Jeshu was crucified 
was a garden, and in the garden a new 
sepulchre where one yet had not been laid. 

* And they laid there Jeshu, because the 
shabath was coming in and the sepulchre was 
near. 


20:1 But in the first in the week came Mariam 
Magdalitha in the early-morn, (while it was) yet 
dark, unto the house of burial. And she saw the 
stone that it was taken from the sepulchre. 

? And she ran, and came to Shemun Kipha, and 
to that other disciple, whom Jeshu loved, saying 
to them, They have taken away our Lord from 
that house of burial, and | know not where they 
have laid him. 

3 And Shemun went forth, and that other 
disciple, and they came to the house of burial. 

4 And they ran both of them together; but that 
disciple ran before Shemun, and came first to 
the house of burial. 

° And looking, he saw the cloths lying, but 
entering he entered not. 

ê But Shemun came after him, and went into the 
house of burial, and saw the cloths set, 

7 and the napkin that had been bound upon his 
head, not with the cloths, but folded up, and laid 
apart in one place. 

è Then went in also that disciple who came first 
to the house of burial, and he saw, and believed. 
? For not yet knew they the scriptures, that he 
was to rise from the dead. 

10 _ And those disciples went again to their place. 

1 But Mariam stood at the sepulchre weeping: 
and while weeping, she looked into the 
sepulchre, 

and saw two angels in white, who were 
sitting, one at his pillows, and one at his feet, 
where the body of Jeshu had lain. 

° And they say to her, Woman, why weepest 
thou? She saith to them, Because they have 
taken away my Lord, and | know not where they 
have laid him. 

14 This said she, and turned herself back, and 
saw Jeshu standing, and knew not that it was 
Jeshu. 

15 Jeshu saith to her, Woman, why weepest 
thou? And whom seekest thou? But she thought 
he was the gardener, and said to him, Sir, if thou 
have taken him away, tell me where thou hast 
laid him, and I will go (and) take him away. 


16 Jeshu saith to her, Mariam. She turned and 
saith to him in Hebrew, Rabuni, which is saying, 
Malphona. 

7 Jeshu saith to her, Touch??? me not; for not 
yet have | ascended to my Father: but go to my 
brethren, and say to them, | ascend to my 
Father, and to your Father, to my God, and to 
your God. 

18 Then went Mariam Magdalitha, and 
announced to the disciples that she had seen 
our Lord, and (that) these (words) he had 
spoken to her. 

19 When it was the evening of that day which 
(was) the first in the week, and the doors were 
shut where the disciples were, for fear of the 
Jinudoyee, came Jeshu, stood among them, and 
said to them, Peace (be) with you.” 
°° This he said, and showed them his hands 
and his side. And the disciples rejoiced when 
they saw our Lord. 

Then said Jeshu unto them, Peace (be) with 
you: as my Father sent me, | also send you. 

And when he had said these, he breathed on 
them, and said to them, Receive the Spirit of 
Holiness: 

if you forgive sins to a man, they shall be 
forgiven to him; and if you retain (the sins) of a 
man, they are retained. 

4 But Thoma, one of the twelve, he who was 
called the Twin, was not there with them when 
Jeshu came. 

*° And the disciples say to him, We have seen 
our Lord. But he said to them, Unless | see in his 
hands the places of the nails, and put into them 
my fingers, and extend my hand into his side, | 
believe not. 
°° And after eight days again within were the 
disciples, and Thoma with them. And Jeshu 
came, while the doors were shut, stood in the 
midst, and said to them, Peace (be) with you. 

*7 And he said to Thoma, Bring thy finger hither 
and see my hands, and bring thy hand and 
thrust it into my side, and be not unbelieving but 
believing. 

?8 And Thoma answered and said to him, My 
Lord, and my God!” 

*° Jeshu saith to him, Now that thou hast seen, 
thou hast believed: blessed are they who have 
not seen me, and have believed. 


282 


78 John 20:17 - Or, approach 


John 20:19 - Shalomo amkun 
John 20:22 - Kabélu Rucho daKudsho 
John 20:28 - Mari Valohi 


283 
284 
285 


°° But many other signs did Jeshu before his 
disciples: those are not written in this record; 

" but these are written, that you may believe 
that Jeshu is the Meshicha, the Son of Aloha, 
and that when you have believed you may have 
in his name the life which is eternal. 


21:1 After these Jeshu again showed himself to 
his disciples at the sea of Tiberios; and he 
showed (himself) thus. 

* There were together Shemun Kipha, and 
Thoma who was called the Twin, and Nathanael, 
he who was of Kotna of Galila, and the sons of 
Zabdai, and two other of the disciples. 

3 Shemun Kipha saith to them, | go to net 
fishes. They say to him, We also go with thee. 
And they went forth and ascended into a vessel; 
and through that night they netted nothing. 

But when it was morning Jeshu stood on the 
sea shore; but the disciples knew not that it was 
Jeshu. 

° And Jeshu said to them, Children, have you 
any thing to eat? They say to him, No. 

He saith to them, Cast your net on the right 
side of the vessel, and you shall find. And they 
cast (it), and could not draw the net for the 
multitude of fishes which it held. 

7 And that disciple whom Jeshu loved said to 
Kipha, This is our Lord. But Shemun, when he 
heard that it was our Lord, took his tunic, and 
threw it over his loins, for he was naked, and 
cast himself into the sea to come to Jeshu. 

ê But the other disciples came in the vessel, for 
they were not far from the land, but as two 
hundred ameen, and they drew that net of 
fishes. 

? Then when they had ascended the land, they 
saw coals laid, and fish laid upon them, and 
bread. 

10 And Jeshu said, Bring of the fish which you 
have now caught. 

1 And Shemun Kipha went up, and drew the 
net to land full of great fishes, an hundred and 
fifty and three: yet for all this weight that net was 
not broken. 

12 And Jeshu said to them, Come, dine. But one 
of the disciples did not dare to ask him, Who is 
he? For they knew that it was our Lord. 

° And Jeshu drew near, and took bread, and 
fish, and gave to them. 

“ This is the third time that Jeshu was seen by 
his disciples when he had risen from among the 
dead. 

15 When they had dined, Jeshu said to Shemun 
Kipha, Shemun bar Jona, lovest thou me more 
than these? He saith to him, Yes, my Lord, thou 


knowest that | love thee. Jeshu saith to him, 
Feed my lambs. 

1€ He saith to him again the second time, 
Shemun bar Jona, lovest thou me? He saith to 
him, Yes, my Lord, thou knowest that | love 
thee. Jeshu saith to him, Feed my sheep. 

17 Jeshu saith to him again the third time, 
Shemun bar Jona, lovest thou me? And it 
grieved Kipha that he said to him the third time, 
Lovest thou me? And he said to him, My Lord, 
all things thou understandest, thou knowest that 
| love thee. Jeshu saith to him, Feed my sheep. 
18 Amen, | say to thee, When thou wast young, 
thou didst gird thy loins and walk whithersoever 
thou willedst; but when thou art old, thou shalt 
stretch forth thy hands, and another will bind thy 
loins, and conduct thee whither thou willest not. 
19 But this he said, to show by what death he 
was to glorify Aloha. And when he had said 
these, he said to him, Come after me. 

And Shemun turned, and saw the disciple 
whom Jeshu loved following; he, who leaned at 
the supper upon the bosom of Jeshu, and said, 
My Lord, who is he that betrayeth thee? 

?1 This when Kipha saw, he said to Jeshu, My 
Lord, and this, what? 

?? Jeshu saith to him, If I will that this wait until | 
come, what (is that) to thee? Come thou after 
me. 

?3 And that word went forth among the brethren, 
that that disciple dieth not. But Jeshu did not 
say, He dieth not, but, If | will that this (man) wait 
until | come, what (is that) to thee? 

*4 This is the disciple who hath testified of all 
these, and hath also written them: and we know 
that the truth is his testimony. 

*° There are also many other things which 
Jeshu hath done, those that if one by one they 
were written, not the world also itself, as | think, 
would suffice for the books that could be written. 


The Book of the Acts 


1:1 The former writing, O Theophilus, | wrote 
concerning all those (things) which our Lord 
Jeshu Meshiha began to do and to teach, 

? until that day in which he was taken up, after 
that he had instructed”? those apostles whom 
he had chosen by the Holy Spirit: 

to whom also he showed himself alive, after 
he had suffered, with many signs, for forty days, 
appearing to them, and discoursing on the 
kingdom of Aloha. 

“ And when he had eaten bread with them, he 
directed them that from Urishlem they should not 
remove; but await the promise of the Father, 
which, [said he,] you have heard from me. 

° For Juhanon baptized with waters, but you 
shall be baptized with the Spirit of Holiness after 
days not many. 

ê But they when assembled asked him, and said 
to him, Our Lord, at this time wilt thou restore?” 
the kingdom to Israel? 

7 He saith to them, This is not yours to know the 
time or the times which the Father hath reposed 
in his own authority: 

è but when the Spirit of Holiness hath come 
upon you, you shall receive power to be made 
unto me the witnesses, in Urishlem and in all 
Jehud, and also among the Shomroyee, and 
unto the confines of the earth. 

* And as these he said, while they beheld him, 
he was taken up, and the cloud received him, 
and he was covered from their eyes. 

10 And while they looked to the heavens?’ as 
he went, two men were found standing with 
them in white vestments; 

11 and they said to them, Men, Galiloyee, why 
stand you looking to the heavens? this Jeshu 
who is taken up from you into the heavens will 
so come as you have seen him ascend into the 
heavens. 

12 And afterward they returned to Urishlem from 
the mount which is called the place of Olives, 
which is over against Urishlem, and distant from 
her as seven stadias. 

13 And after they had entered, they ascended to 
that upper room in which were Petros, and 
Juhanon, and Jakub, and Andros, and Philipos, 
and Thoma, and Mathai, and Bar Tolmai, and 


86 Acts 1:2 - Or, commanded 


Acts 1:6 — Or, return 
Acts 1:10 — Or, into Heaven 


287 
288 


Jakub bar Halphai, and Shemun the Zealous, 
and Jihuda bar Jakub. 

14 These altogether persevered in prayer with 
one soul, with the women, and with Mariam the 
mother of Jeshu, and with his brethren. 

15 And in those days arose Shemun Kipha in the 
midst of the disciples;—now there was there an 
assembly of men as an hundred and twenty;— 
and said, 

16 Men, brethren, it was right for that scripture to 
be fulfilled which the Spirit of Holiness had 
before spoken, by the mouth of David, 
concerning Jihuda, who was the leader of them 
who took Jeshu. 

17 For he had numbered with us, and had part in 
this ministry. 

18 This is he who obtained the field with the 
wages of sin, and fell upon his face on the 
ground, and was severed in his middle, and all 
his bowels were shed forth. 

19 And this hath been known of all who dwell in 
Urishlem; and so is called that field in the 
language of the country Hakel-damo, the 
interpretation of which is, A field of blood. 

For it is written in the book of Psalms: Let his 
habitation be desert, And no inhabitant be 
therein, And his ministry let another take. 

21 There needeth therefore one from these men 
who have been with us in all this time in which 
our Lord Jeshu hath come in and gone out 
among us, 

2? which went forth from the baptism of Juhanon 
until the day that he was taken up from (being) 
with us, to be with us a witness of his 
resurrection. 

?3 And they set up two: Jauseph, who is called 
Barshaba, who is surnamed Justus, and Mathia. 
24 And praying, they said, Thou, Lorb, (who) 
knowest the hearts of all, show the one whom 
thou choosest of these two, 

*° that he may receive the part in the ministry 
and the apostleship from which Jihuda 
separated, to go unto his place. 
°° And they cast the lots, and it came up unto 
Mathia; and he was numbered with the eleven 
apostles. 


2:1 And when the days of pentecost were 
fulfilled, while they were assembled all together, 
* there was suddenly from heaven the voice as 
of a mighty wind, and all that house in which 
they were sitting was filled with it; 


3 and tongues that were divided like fire 
appeared to them, and sat upon each one of 
them. 

“And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, 
and they began to speak in several tongues as 
the Spirit gave them to speak. 

° But there were men dwelling in Urishlem who 
feared Aloha; Jihudoyee, from all the peoples 
who are under heaven. 

ê And when that voice was made, the whole 
people assembled and were perturbed, because 
every man of them heard as they spoke in their 
(several) tongues. 

7 (And) they were all astonished, and wondered, 
saying one to another, These all who speak, 
behold, are they not Galiloyee? 

8 How hear we (then) each in his own tongue in 
which we were born? 

z Parthoyee and Medoyee and Alanoyee, and 
they who dwell in the Place of Rivers”, 
Jihudoyee and Kapadukoyee, and of the region 
of Pontos and of Asia; 

10 and from the land of Phrygia and of 
Pamphylia and of Metsreen, and the regions of 
Lybi neighbouring upon Kyrine, and those who 
come from Rumi, Jihudoyee, and Proselytes, 

11 [Gíuree,] and from Krete and Arabia, behold, 
we hear them speaking in our tongues the 
wonders of Aloha. 

12 But all of them were amazed and admired, 
saying one to another, Of whom is this thing? 

13 But others mocked them, saying, These have 
drunk new wine, and are inebriate. 

14 And afterwards arose Shemun Kipha with the 
eleven apostles, and lifted up his voice and said 
to them: Men, Jihudoyee, and all who dwell at 
Urishlem, be this known to you, and hearken to 
my words. 

1° For not as you suppose are these drunken; 
for, behold, until now are [there but] three hours. 
1ê But this is that spoken of by Joel the prophet: 
17 It shall be in the last days, saith Aloha, | will 
pour [out] my Spirit upon all flesh: And your sons 
and your daughters shall prophesy, And your 
youths shall see visions, And your elders shall 
dream dreams: 

18 And upon the servants and upon the 
handmaids Will | pour my Spirit in those days; 
And they shall prophesy. 

19 And | will give signs in heaven, And mighty 
(deeds) on earth; Blood and fire and clouds of 
smoke: 


89 Acts 2:9 - Beit Naharain 


2 The sun shall be turned into darkness, And 
the moon into blood, Before shall come the day 
of the Lorb, great and fearful; 

?1 And every one who shall call [upon] the name 
Of the Lorp shall be saved. 

22 Men, sons of Israel, hear these words; Jeshu 
Natsroya, the man who from Aloha appeared 
with you, with powers and mighty acts, which 
Aloha wrought among you by his hand, (even) 
as you know, 

?3 This, who was separated thereunto by the 
foreknowledge and by the will of Aloha, you 
delivered into the hands of the wicked, and 
crucified and slew. 

* But Aloha raised him, and loosed the bands 
of Shiul, because it was not possible that he 
should be holden in Shiul. 

*° For David said concerning him, | have 
foreseen my Lord at all time, Who is at my right 
hand that | should not be moved; 
°° Wherefore my heart is glad, And my glory 
rejoiceth: And also my body shall sojourn in 
hope; 

?” For thou wilt not leave my soul in Shiul, Nor 
give thy Saint to see corruption. 

8 Thou wilt reveal to me the way of life, Thou 
wilt fill me with joy with thy presence. 

*° Men, brethren, suffer me to speak openly with 
you concerning the chief-father David, that he is 
dead and also buried, and his sepulchre is with 
us till this day. 

3 For he was a prophet, and knew that the oath 
Aloha had sworn to him, Of the fruit of thy loins | 
will cause to sit upon thy throne: 

31 And he foresaw and spake concerning the 
resurrection of the Meshiha, that He would not 
be left in Shiul, nor would his body see 
corruption. 

3? This Jeshu hath Aloha raised, and we all are 
his witnesses. 

33 And he it is who at the right hand of Aloha is 
exalted, and hath received of the Father the 
promise of the Holy Spirit, and hath shed forth 
this gift, which, behold, you see and you hear. 

3% For David hath not ascended into heaven, 
because he himself hath said, The Lorb said 
unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand 

° Until | place thine adversaries the stool of thy 
feet. 

°° Assuredly, then, let all the house of Israel 
know, that Lord and Meshiha hath Aloha made 
this Jeshu, whom you crucified. 

37 And when they heard, they were pierced in 
their heart, and said to Shemun and to the rest 
of the apostles, What shall we do, brethren? 


38 Shemun saith to them, Repent, and be 
baptized, every man of you, in the name of the 
Lorb Jeshu, for the remission of sins, and you 
shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. 

°° For to you is the promise, and to your 
children, and to all them who are afar off, whom 
Aloha himself shall call. 

“° And with many other words he testified to 
them and entreated of them, saying, Save 
(yourselves) from this perverse generation. 

1 And some of them eagerly received his word 
and believed and were baptized, and there were 
added in that day as three thousand souls. 

? And they were faithful in the doctrine of the 
apostles, and participated in prayer and in the 
breaking of the eucharist. 

? And solemnity was on every soul; and many 
signs and mighty acts were done by the hand of 
the apostles in Urishlem. 

44 And all those who believed were together, 
and every thing they had was in common. 

45 And they who had property sold it, and 
divided to each according to that which he 
needed. 

“© And every day they continued in the temple 
with one soul, and in the house they brake the 
bread, and took their food rejoicing and in the 
cleanness of their hearts, 

* praising Aloha, (and) given (to be) in favour 
before all the people. And our Lord added daily 
them who were saved into the church. 


3:1 And it was that as Shemun Kipha and 
Juhanon ascended together to the temple at the 
time of prayer, which is the ninth hour, 

? behold a certain man lame from the womb of 
his mother, (whom) they carried, who were used 
to bring and set at the gate of the temple which 
is called the Beautiful, to beg alms of those who 
entered into the temple. 

3 He, when he saw Shemun and Juhanon 
entering the temple, prayed of them to give him 
alms. 

“ And Shemun and Juhanon beheld him, and 
said to him, Regard us. 

° But he regarded them, expecting to receive 
from them somewhat. 

Shemun saith to him, Gold and silver | have 
not, but what I have | give thee: In the name of 
our Lord Jeshu Meshiha Natsroya, rise and 
walk. 

7 And he took him by his right hand and raised 
him: and instantly his feet strengthened and his 
heels. 


è And he leaped and arose and walked, and 
entered with them into the temple, walking, and 
leaping, and glorifying Aloha. 

* And all the people saw him walking and 
glorifying Aloha. 

10 And they knew that it was he, the beggar, 
who had sat daily and asked alms at the gate 
which is called the Beautiful. And they were filled 
with wonder and astonishment at what had been 
done. 

" And as he held Shemun and Juhanon, all the 
people ran wondering unto them to the portico 
which is called Of Shelemun. 

And when Shemun saw, he answered and 
said to them, Men, sons of Israel, why wonder 
you at this? or why gaze you at us, as [though] 
by power of ours, or by our (own) authority, we 
had done this, that this (man) should walk? 

13 The God of Abraham, and of Ishok, and of 
Jakub, the God of our fathers, hath glorified his 
son Jeshu, him whom you delivered up, and 
denied before the face of Pilatos, when he had 
justified (him) and would have released him; 

14 but you the Holy and the Just denied, and 
demanded for you the man the murderer to be 
given to you. 

15 And Him the Prince of life you killed, whom 
Aloha hath raised from among the dead; and we 
all are his witnesses. 

16 And by faith in his name, this, whom you see 
and know, he hath strengthened and healed; 
and faith which is in him hath given to him this 
soundness before you all. 

K Now, however, my brethren, | know that 
through delusion you did this, as also did your 
princes; 

18 and Aloha, according to that which he had 
before proclaimed by the mouth of all the 
prophets, that his Meshiha should suffer, hath 
fulfilled this. 

? Repent therefore, and be converted, that your 
sins may be blotted out, and that the times of 
repose may come to you from before the 
presence of the LORD; 

and he may send to you Him whom he hath 
ordained for you, Jeshu Meshiha, 

whom the heavens must receive until the 
completion of the times of all those which Aloha 
hath spoken by the mouth of his holy prophets, 
who (have been) from of old. 

22 For Musha hath said, A prophet shall the 
LORD raise up unto you from your brethren, like 
to me; him hear in all (things) which he shall 
speak with you. 


?3 And it shall be that every soul who will not 
hear that prophet, perish shall that soul from his 
people. 

?4 And the prophets, all of them from Shamuel 
and they who were after him, spake and 
proclaimed concerning these days. 

?5 You are the sons of the prophets; and the 
covenant which Aloha set with our fathers, 
saying unto Abraham, In thy seed shall be 
blessed all the generations of the earth, with you 
from the first he hath established; 

28 and Aloha hath sent his Son, blessing you, if 
you will return and repent of your iniquities. 


4:1 And while they spake these words to the 
people, the priests, and Zadukoyee, and the 
governors of the temple, arose against them, 
being angered against them because they 
taught the people, and preached through the 
Meshiha the resurrection from the dead. 
? And they laid upon them hands, and kept them 
unto the day after, because the evening had 
drawn nigh. 
* And many who heard the word believed; and 
they were in number as five thousand men. 
° And the day after, the rulers, and elders, and 
sophree, assembled, 
ê and also Hanan chief of the priests, and 
Kaiapha, and Juhanon, and Alexandros, and 
they who were of the race of the chief priests. 
7 And when they had made them stand in the 
midst, they questioned them, By what power, or 
in what name, have you done this? 
è Then Shemun Kipha was filled with the Spirit 
of Holiness, and said to them, Rulers of the 
people, and elders of the house of Israel, hear: 
* If we this day are judged of you concerning the 
good which has been done to the infirm man, 
insomuch that he is cured; 
10 be this known to you, and to all the people of 
Israel, that in the name of Jeshu Meshiha 
Natsroya, whom you crucified, whom Aloha hath 
raised from among the dead, through this 
Himself, behold, this (man) standeth before you 
well. 
11 This is the stone which you builders rejected, 
and he is become the head of the corner. 

And in no other one”” is redemption: for 
there is no other name under heaven given to 
mankind, by which we must be saved. 

13 And when they heard the words of Shemun 
and of Juhanon, which they had confidently 
spoken, they perceived that they knew not 


2 Acts 4:12 — in no other man 


literature and were common-men™”", and 
wondered at them; and they recognised them, 
that with Jeshu they had been conversant. 

14 And they saw that the lame man who had 
been healed was standing with them, and they 
could not say any thing against them. 

15 Then they commanded that they should lead 
them from their assembly, 

16 and said one to another, What shall we do 
with these men? For, behold, a conspicuous 
sign which hath been done by their hands to all 
the inhabitants of Urishlem is known, and we 
cannot deny. 

7 But that this report may not go forth more 
[widely], we will threaten them that again they 
shall not speak in This Name to any man?”. 

è And they called them, and commanded them 
that not at all they should speak and teach in the 
name of Jeshu. 

Shemun Kipha and Juhanon answered and 
said to them, If it be right before Aloha that you 
we obey rather than Aloha, judge you. 

For what we have seen and heard we cannot 
but speak. 

?1 And they threatened them, and dismissed 
them; for they could not find cause to lay [a 
penalty] upon their head*”’, because of the 
people; for every one glorified Aloha for that 
which had been done. 

?? For a son of more than forty years was that 
man in whom had been wrought this sign of 
healing. 

?3 And when they were dismissed they came to 
their brethren, and made known to them 
whatever the priests and elders had said. 

*4 And they, when they had heard, with one 
accord lifted up their voice unto Aloha, and said, 
Lorp, thou art God who hast made heaven and 
earth and the seas, and all that is in them: 
2° And thou art he who hast spoken by the Spirit 
of Holiness in the mouth of David thy servant: 
Why rage the Heathen, And the peoples imagine 
vanity? 

6 The kings and powers of the earth arise And 
counsel together against the Lorp, And against 
his Meshiha. 

*7 Eor verily they are assembled in this city 
against thy holy Son Jeshu, whom thou hast 
anointed,—Herodes and Pilatos with the 
Gentiles and the synagogue of Israel, 


21 Acts 4:13 - Hediutee 


Acts 4:17 - To a man of men 
Acts 4:21 - Compare chap. xxii. 5, Syriac; and 
SCHAAF. Lex. in verb 


292 
293 


*8 __to work whatsoever thy hand and thy will 
have signified before should be done. 

*° And now also, Lorb, behold and see their 
threatenings, and give unto thy servants with 
boldness to preach thy word, 

3 while thy hand thou outstretchest unto 
healings and mighty works which they shall do in 
the name of thy holy Son Jeshu. 

31 And as they prayed and supplicated, the 
place in which they were assembled was 
moved, and they were all filled with the Spirit of 
Holiness, and they spake with openness the 
word of Aloha. 

32 But to the assembly of the men who believed 
there was one soul and one mind; and no man 
of them said of the goods which he possessed 
that they were his own, but all whatever they 
had was in common. 

33 And with great power did those apostles 
testify concerning the resurrection of Jeshu 
Meshiha, and great grace was with all of them. 

And no man of them had want; for they who 
possessed fields and houses sold [them], and 
brought the prices of whatever was sold 

° and laid at the feet of the apostles, and there 
was given to each according to that which was 
needed. 
°° But Jauseph, who was entitled Bar Naba by 
the apostles, which is interpreted, A son of 
consolation, a Levoya from the Isle of Kypros, 
%7 had a field, and he sold it, and brought its 
price and laid before the feet of the apostles. 


5:1 And a certain man whose name was 
Hanania, with his wife whose name was 
Shaphira, sold a field, 

? and took from its value and concealed, while 
his wife consented, and brought of it silver and 
laid before the feet of the apostles. 

3 And Shemun said to him, Hanania, how hath 
Satana thus filled thine heart that thou shouldest 
lie to the Spirit of Holiness, and conceal from the 
silver of the price of the field? 

Was it not thine own until it should be sold? 
and when it was sold thou hadst yet power over 
the price of it. Why hast thou laid up in thy heart 
to do this thing? Thou hast not lied unto men, 
but unto Aloha! 

And when Hanania heard these words he fell 
and died. And there was great fear upon all 
those who heard. 

ê And they who were „young men among them 
arose and composed®™ him, [and] carried him 
forth and buried him. 


294 Acts 5:6 — Collected, or gathered up 


7 And after there had been three hours, his wife 

also entered, not knowing what had been done. 

è Shemun said to her, Tell me if for these prices 
you sold the field? But she said, Yes: for these 
prices. 

? Shemun said to her, Why have you agreed to 
tempt the Spirit of the Lord? Lo, the feet of the 
buriers of thy husband are at the door, and they 
will carry thee out! 

° And at once she fell before their feet and 
died. And those young men entered and found 
her dead, and they laid her out, and brought her 
forth and buried her by the side of her husband. 

" And there was great fear upon all the church 
and in all them who heard. 

And by the hand of the apostles were done 
great signs and mighty works among the people: 
and all gathered together at the portico of 
Shelemun. 

13 And from the others not a man dared to come 
near them; but the people magnified them. 

* And the more were they who believed added 
to the LorbD, an assemblage of men and of 
women; 

15 so that into the streets they brought forth the 
diseased lying on beds, that, when Shemun 
should come, even his shadow might 
overshadow them. 

16 But there came many to them from the other 
cities round about Urishlem, bringing the 
diseased and those who had unclean spirits: 
and they were healed, all of them. 

7 And the chief of the priests, and they who 
were with him, who were of the doctrine of the 
Zadukoyee, were filled with envy, 

è and they laid hands on the apostles, and 
apprehended and bound them in the house of 
the bound. 

19 Then in the night the angel of the Lorp 
opened the gate of the house of the bound, and 
brought them forth, and said to them, 

Go stand in the temple and speak to the 
people all these words of salvation. 

And they went forth in the time of morning, 
and entered the temple, and taught. But the 
chief of the priests and they who were with him 
arose (and) convoked their associates and the 
elders of Israel, and sent to the house of the 
bound to bring the apostles. 

22 And when they who were sent from them 
went, they found them not (in) the house of the 
bound; and they returned, and came, 

?3 and said, We found the house of the bound 
shut carefully”? , and the keepers standing at the 


235 Acts 5:23 — Or, cautiously 


gates: and we opened, but no man found we 
there. 

?4 And when the chief priests and rulers of the 
temple heard these words, they were astounded 
by them, and reasoned, what this was. 

* And one came and declared to them, Those 
men whom you shut up in the house of the 
bound, behold, they are standing in the temple 
and teaching the people. 

°° Then went the rulers with the satellites to 
bring them, not with violence, for they feared lest 
the people should stone them; 

?7 and when they had brought them they made 
them stand before all the assembly, and the 
chief of the priests began to say to them, 

?8 Did we not commanding command you, that 
you should teach no man in this name? But, 
behold, you have filled Urishlem with your 
doctrine, and you will to bring upon us the blood 
of this man! 

Shemun answered with the apostles and said 
to them, Aloha must we obey rather than men. 
°° The God of our fathers hath raised up Jeshu 
whom you killed and hanged on the tree. 

31 Him hath Aloha constituted a Prince anda 
Saviour, and elevated him at his right hand, to 
give repentance and remission of sins unto 
Israel. 

32 And we are witnesses of these words, and 
the Spirit of Holiness himself, whom Aloha hath 
given to them who believe in him. 

And when they heard these words they were 
transported with rage, and were mindful to kill 
them. 

34 And one of the Pharishee arose, whose name 
was Gamaliel, a doctor of the law, and honoured 
by all the people, and commanded to take the 
apostles without a little time. 

3 And he said to them, Men, sons of Israel, 
beware of yourselves, and consider what it 
behoves you to do concerning these men. 

°° For before this time arose Thuda, and said of 
himself that he was something great, and there 
went after him four hundred men: and he was 
slain, and they who went after him were 
scattered and became as nothing. 

Afterward arose Jihuda Galiloya in the days 
when men were enregistered for the head-silver, 
and tempted much people after him; and he 
died, and all they who went after him were 
scattered. 

38 And now | say to you, keep aloof from these 
men, and dismiss them; for if from men be this 


imagination*”° and this work, it will be dissolved 
and end; 

39 but if it be from Aloha, there is no power in 
your hands to bring it to an end: lest you should 
be found to have arisen against Aloha. 

“° And they were persuaded by him, and called 
the apostles, and scourged them, and 
commanded them that they should not teach in 
the name of Jeshu, and loosed them. 

# And they went out from before them, rejoicing 
to be worthy for the sake of the Name to be ill 
treated. 

“ And they ceased not daily to teach in the 
temple, and in the house, and to preach 
concerning our Lord Jeshu Meshiha. 


6:1 And in those days the disciples being many, 
the Javnoyee disciples murmured against the 
Ebroyee because their widows were slighted in 
the daily ministration. 

? And the twelve apostles called all the 
assembly of the disciples and said to them, It is 
not fit that we should leave the word of Aloha, 
and serve tables. 

Look out therefore, brethren, and choose 
seven men from you who have testimony 
concerning them, and are full of the Spirit of the 
LorD and wisdom, and we will appoint them over 
this matter. 

* And we will be constant in prayer, and in the 
ministration of the word. 

° And this saying was pleasing before all the 
people; and they chose Estephanos, a man who 
was full of faith and the Spirit of Holiness; and 
Philipos, and Prokoros, and Nicanor, and Timon, 
and Parmena, and Nikolos, a proselyte of 
Antiokia. 

ê And these they set before the apostles: and 
while praying they laid upon them the hand. 

7 And the word of Aloha increased, and the 
number of the disciples increased in Urishlem 
greatly: and much people of the Jinudoyee were 
obedient to the faith. 

But Estephanos was filled with grace and 
power, and wrought signs and miracles among 
the people. 

And men arose from the congregation which 
was Called Libertinu, Kyrainoyee, and 
Aleksandroyee, and from Cilicia, and from Asia, 
and disputed with Estephanos, 

1° and were not able to stand against the 
wisdom and the spirit which spake in him. 


°° Acts 5:37 — Or, thought 


11 Then they sent men and instructed them to 
say, We have heard him speak words of 
blasphemy against Musha and against Aloha. 
12 And they stirred up the people and the elders 
and the sophree, and came and rose upon him, 
and carried him away and brought him into the 
midst of the assembly. 

13 And witnesses of falsehood arose, and said, 
This man ceases not from speaking words 
contrary to the law and against this holy place. 
14 Eor we have heard him say that this Jeshu 
Natsroya shall destroy this place, and shall 
change the customs which Musha delivered 
unto us. 

15 And all they who sat in the assembly looked 
upon him, and saw his face as the face of an 
angel. 


7:1 And the chief of the priests demanded if 
these (things) were so? 

But he said, Men, brethren, and fathers, hear! 
The God of glory appeared to our father 
Abraham while he was between the rivers, [and 
while] he had not yet come to dwell in Charan, 

and said to him, Go forth from thy country and 
from (being) with the sons of thy family, and 
come to the land that | will show thee. 

4 Then went forth Abraham from the land of the 
Kaldoyee, and came and dwelt in Charan: and 
from thence, his father being dead, Aloha 
caused him to pass into this land in which you 
dwell to-day. 

° And (yet) he gave him no inheritance in it, nor 
a place of the feet, but he promised to give it to 
him for an heritage to himself and to his seed, 
while as yet he had not a son. 

ê And Aloha spake with him, telling him that his 
seed should be a sojourner in a strange land, 
and that they would enslave and ill treat them 
four hundred years. 

7 And the nation whom they will serve (in) 
bondage will | judge, saith Aloha: and afterward 


they shall come forth and serve me in this place. 


And he gave to him the covenant of 
circumcision. And then begat he Ishok, and 
circumcised him on the eighth day, and Ishok 
begat Jakub, and Jakub begat our twelve 
fathers. 

* And these our fathers were incited against 
Jauseph, and sold him into Mitsreen. And Aloha 
was with him: 

10 and he delivered him from all his afflictions, 
and gave him grace and wisdom before Pherun 
king of Mitsreen, and he appointed him prince 
over Mitsreen, and over all his house. 


11 And there was a famine and great affliction in 
all Mitsreen, and in the land of Kenaan, and our 
fathers had nothing to satisfy them. 

And when Jakub heard that there was corn in 
Mitsreen, he sent forth our fathers before. 

13 And when they had gone the second time, 
Jauseph made himself known to his brethren, 
and the family of Jauseph were made known 
unto Pherun. 

14 And Jauseph sent and brought his father 
Jakub and all his family, and they were in 
number seventy and five souls. 

And Jakub went down into Mitsreen and died 
there; he and our fathers. 

ê And he was removed to Shechem, and laid in 
the sepulchre that Abraham bought with silver 
from the B’nai Chamur. 

7 And when was come the time of that which 
Aloha promised with an oath unto Abraham, the 
people had multiplied and increased in Mitsreen 

18 until another king had arisen over Mitsreen, 
who knew not Jauseph, 

19 and he dealt fraudulently against our kindred, 
and shamefully entreated our fathers, and 
commanded that their children should be cast 
away’, that they might not live. 

In that time Musha was born, and was 
beloved of Aloha, and was brought up three 
months in the house of his father. 

21 And when he was outcast from his people, 
the daughter of Pherun found him, and brought 
him up unto her for a son. 

22 And Musha was instructed in all the wisdom 
of the Mitsroyee, and was excellent in words 
(and) also in deeds. 

?3 And when he became a son of forty years, it 
arose upon his heart to visit his brethren the 
sons of Israel. 

*4 And he saw one of the sons of his tribe 
treated with violence, and he avenged him, and 
did him justice, and he killed the Mitsroya who 
had offended him 

*° and hoped that his brethren, the sons of 
Israel, would understand that Aloha by his hand 
would give them deliverance; but they 
understood not. 

°° And the day after he appeared to them while 
they strove one with another: and he persuaded 
them to be pacified, saying, Men, you are 
brethren; why offend you one the other? 

? But he who had offended his neighbour 
removed himself from him, and said to him, Who 
appointed thee over us a prince and a judge? 


"7 Acts 7:18 — Or, destroyed 


?8 Seekest thou to kill me as thou killedst the 
Mitsroya yesterday? 

*° And Musha fled at that word, and became a 
sojourner in the land of Median, and there were 
to him two sons. 

°° And when forty years were there fulfilled to 
him, there appeared to him in the desert of 
Mount Sinai the angel of the Lor in a flame that 
burned in a bush. 

31 And while Musha looked, he wondered at the 
sight. And as he drew near to gaze, the LORD 
spake to him with the voice: 

? 1am the God of thy fathers, the God of 
Abraham and of Ishok and of Jakub. And 
Musha, trembling, dared not look upon the sight. 
33 And the Lorn said to him, Loose thy sandals 
from thy feet: for the ground on which thou 
standest is holy. 

4 Seeing | have seen the affliction of my people 
who [are] in Mitsreen, and his groaning | have 
heard, and | have descended that | may deliver 
them. And now come, | will send thee into 
Mitsreen. 

°° This Musha whom they denied, when they 
said, Who appointed thee over us a prince anda 
judge? this, sent Aloha unto them a prince anda 
deliverer by the hand of the angel who appeared 
to him at the bush. 

°° This brought them out, when he had wrought 
signs and wonders and mighty deeds in the land 
of Mitsreen, and at the Sea of Suph, and in the 
desert forty years. 

37 This is that Musha, who said to the sons of 
Israel, A Prophet will Aloha the Lorp raise up 
unto you from your brethren, like me; him shall 
you hear. 

38 This is he who was with the congregation in 
the desert, with the angel himself who spake 
with him and with our fathers at the mountain of 
Sinai; and he it was who received the words of 
life to give (them) to us. 

°° And our fathers willed not to give heed to him, 
but left him, and in their hearts turned back to 
Mitsreen, 

“° saying to Aharun, Make us alohee that may 
go before us, because this Musha, who brought 
us forth from the land of Mitsreen, we know not 
what is become of him. 

And he made them the calf in those days, 
and they sacrificed sacrifices to idols, and were 
delighted with the work of their hands. 

42 And Aloha turned, and delivered them up to 
be worshippers of the hosts of heaven; as it is 
written in the book of the prophets, Forty years 
in the desert Victims or sacrifices did you offer to 
me, Sons of Israel? 


“8 But you took up the tabernacle of Malkum, 
And the star of the god of Raphan, Images you 
have made to worship them; | will remove you 
beyond Babel. 

* Behold, the tabernacle of testimony of our 
fathers was in the desert, as He who spake with 
Musha had commanded to make it after the 
pattern which he had seen. 

4 And this tabernacle also our fathers bringing 
brought in with Jeshu to the land which Aloha 
had given to them, an inheritance from those 
peoples whom he had expelled from before 
them, and it was carried until the days of David; 

ê who found favour before Aloha, and asked to 
find a tabernacle for the God of Jakub. 

“” But Shelemun builded the house. 

“8 But the Most High dwelleth not in the work of 
hands, as saith the prophet, 

? Heaven is my throne, and earth the footstool 
beneath my feet: What house will you build me? 
Saith the Lord: Or what is the place of my rest? 

50 Hath not my hand made all these? 

51 ©, hardened of neck and uncircumcised in 
your hearts and in your hearing, you at all times 
against the Spirit of Holiness stand up; as your 
fathers, so you also. 

52 For which of the prophets have not your 
fathers persecuted and slain? they who before 
announced the coming of the Righteous; him 
whom you delivered up and slew. 

53 And you have received the law by the precept 
of angels, and have not kept it. 

54 And when they heard these they were filled 
with wrath in themselves, and they gnashed 
their teeth upon him. 

°° And he, being full of faith and of the Spirit of 
Holiness, looked up to heaven, and saw the 
glory of Aloha, and Jeshu standing at the right 
hand of Aloha. 

°° And he said, Behold, | see the heavens 
opened, and the Son of man standing at the 
right hand of Aloha. 
°” And they cried with a high voice, and stopped 
their ears, and rushed upon him, all of them, 

è and seizing they brought him out of the city 
and stoned him. And they who witnessed 
against him laid their garments before the feet of 
a certain young man named Shaol. 

And they stoned Estephanos, (he) praying 
and saying, Our Lord Jeshu, receive my spirit. 
6° And kneeling down, he cried with a high 
voice, and said, Our Lord, let not this sin arise 
against them. And when this he had said, he 
slept. 


8:1 But Shaol willed to take part in his killing. 
And there was made in those days a great 
persecution against the church that was in 

Urishlem; and they were all dispersed in the 
country of Jihud and also among the 
Shomroyee, excepting only the apostles. 

? And faithful men laid Estephanos in his tomb, 
and mourned over him greatly. 

3 But Shaol persecuted the church of Aloha, 
going to the houses, and drawing men and 
women delivered them to the house of the 
bound. 

“ And they who were dispersed went about and 
preached the word of Aloha. 

° But Philipos descended to a city of the 
Shomroyee, and preached concerning the 
Meshiha. 

ê And when they heard his word, the men who 
were there attended to him, and were persuaded 
of all that he said: for they saw the signs that he 
wrought. 

’ For many whom unclean spirits possessed 
cried with a high voice, and they came out from 
them; and others, palsied and lame, were 
healed: 

and great joy was in that city. 

But a certain man was there whose name was 
Simon, who had dwelt in that city much time, 
and with his sorceries had deceived the people 
of the Shomroyee, magnifying himself, and 
saying, | am the Great*”’. 

'° And all inclined to him, great and small, and 
said, This is the great Power of Aloha. 

" And they were persuaded by him, because 
that much time by his sorceries he had 
astonished them. 

12 But when they believed Philipos, who 
evangelized the kingdom of Aloha in the name 
of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha, they were baptized, 
men and women. 

13 And Simon also himself believed, and was 
baptized, and adhered to Philipos. And when he 
saw the signs and great works which were done 
by his hands, he wondered and was astonished. 

14 And when the apostles who were at Urishlem 
heard that the people of the Shomroyee had 
received the word of Aloha, they sent to them 
Kipha and Juhanon. 

1> And they went down and prayed for them, 
that they might receive the Spirit of Holiness: 

'© for he was not upon one of them yet; but they 
were only baptized in the name of our Lord 
Jeshu. 


*°8 Acts 8:9 - Ano ‘no Rabo 


17 Then they laid upon them the hand, and they 
received the Spirit of Holiness. 

18 And when Simon saw that by the hand-laying 
of the apostles the Spirit of Holiness was given, 
he offered to them silver, 

13 saying, Give also to me this power, that he on 
whom | shall lay the hand may receive the Spirit 
of Holiness. 

2 Shemun Kipha said to him, Thy silver go with 
thee into perdition, because thou thoughtest that 
the gift of Aloha with the possessions of the 
world might he obtained. 

?1 Thou hast neither part nor lot in this faith, 
because thine heart hath not been right before 
Aloha. 

2? Nevertheless, repent of this thy wickedness, 
and pray of Aloha, that the guile of thy heart may 
haply be forgiven thee; 

?3 for in bitter gall and in the bonds of iniquity | 
see that thou art. 

Simon answered and said, Pray you on my 
behalf, of Aloha, that not any of these things 
which you have spoken may come upon me. 

?S But Shemun and Juhanon, when they had 
testified and taught the word of Aloha, returned 
to Urishlem, and evangelized in many villages of 
the Shomroyee. 
2è And the angel of the Lord spake with 
Philipos, and said to him, Arise, go to the south, 
in the desert way which goeth down from 
Urishlem to Gaza. 

*7 And arising he went. And there met him a 
certain eunuch®”? who had come from Cush, an 
officer of Kandak, queen of the Cushoyee; and 
he was officer over all her treasure. And he had 
been to worship at Urishlem; 

?8 and while returning that he might go, he sat in 
the chariot and read in Eshaia the prophet. 

*° And the Spirit of Holiness said to Philipos, 
Approach, and join the chariot. 
°° And being near, he heard that he read in 
Eshaia the prophet; and he said to him, 
Understandest thou what thou readest? 

And he said, How can | understand, unless 
one teach me? And he prayed of him, of 
Philipos, to ascend and sit with him. 

32 But the section (phosuka) of the scripture in 
which he was reading is this: As a lamb to the 
slaughter was he led; And as a sheep before the 
shearer is silent, So opened not he his mouth 
33 in his humiliation. From oppression and from 
judgment was he led; And his age who shall 
recount? For his life is taken from the earth. 


29 Acts 8:27 - Mahaimna, "a faithful or confidential 


” 


one 


34 That eunuch said unto Philipos, | pray thee, 
of whom speaketh this the prophet? of himself, 
or of another man? 

38 Then Philipos opened his mouth and began, 
from that very scripture, preaching to him 
concerning our Lord Jeshu. 

°° And as they went in the way they came toa 
certain place which had water in it, and that 
eunuch said, Behold the water; what is the 
hinderance that | should be baptized? 


38 And he commanded that the chariot should 
stand; and they descended both of them to the 
water, and Philipos baptized that eunuch. 

°° And when they had ascended from the water, 
the Spirit of the Lord rapt away Philipos, and the 
eunuch again saw him not; but he went on his 
way rejoicing. 

° But Philipos was found at Azotos, and from 
thence he itinerated and evangelized in all the 
cities until he came to Cesarea. 


9:1 But Shaol was yet full of threatenings and 
murderous wrath?’ against the disciples of our 
Lord. 
? And he demanded letters from the chief 
priests which he should give at Darmsuk to the 
synagogues, that if he found (any) who walked 
in this way, men or women, he might bind and 
bring them to Urishlem. 
3 And as he went and began to come nigh to 
Darmsuk, suddenly there shone forth upon him 
a light from heaven; 
* and he fell upon the earth, and heard a voice 
which said to him, Shaol, Shaol, why 
persecutest thou me? It is hard to thee to kick 
against the pricks. 
° He answered and said, Who art thou, my 
Lord? And our Lord said, | am Jeshu Natsroya, 
whom thou persecutest; 
ê but arise, go into Darmsuk, and there it will be 
spoken with thee concerning what thou must do. 
And the men who went with him in the way 
stood astonished, because the voice alone they 
heard, but a man was not seen by them. 
ê And Shaol arose from the earth, and could not 
see any thing when his eyes were opened. And 
they took him by his hand and brought him into 
Darmsuk; 
* and he saw not for three days, neither did he 
eat or drink. 


300 Acts 8:37 - Verse 37 is non-existant in the 


Peschito 
301 Acts 9:1 - Wrath of slaughter 


1° But there was in Darmsuk a certain disciple 
whose name was Hanania. And the Lorp said to 
him in a vision, Hanania. And he said, Behold 
me, my Lord. 

" And our Lord said to him, Arise, go to the 
street which is called the Straight, and inquire in 
the house of Jihuda for Shaol, who is from 
Tarsos the city. For, behold, while praying, 

12 he hath seen in a vision a man whose name 
is Hanania, who entered and laid upon him the 
hand that his eyes might be opened. 

13 And Hanania said, My Lord, | have heard 
from many concerning this man, of how much 
evil he hath brought upon thy saints in Urishlem. 

14 And behold, here also he hath authority from 
the chief priests to bind all those who invoke thy 
name. 

15 And the Lorn said to him, Arise, go; for a 
vessel is he to me, chosen to bear my name to 
the nations, and to kings, and to the house of 
the sons of Israel. 

16 For | will show him what he is to suffer on 
account of my name. 

Then Hanania went to the house unto him, 
and he laid upon him the hand, and said to him, 
Shaol, my brother, our Lord Jeshu hath sent me; 
He who appeared to thee in the way while thou 
wast coming, that thine eyes may be opened, 
and thou mayest be filled with the Spirit of 
Holiness. 

18 And instantly there fell from his eyes 
something which was like to scales; and his 
eyes were opened, and, arising, he was 
baptized. 

19 And he took food and was strengthened, and 
was (certain) days with those disciples who were 
in Darmsuk. 

20 And at once he preached in the synagogues 
of the Jinudoyee concerning Jeshu, that he is 
the Son of Aloha. 

?1 And all they who heard him wondered, and 
they said, Is not this he who persecuted all those 
who call upon this name in Urishlem? And 
behold, also, hither upon the self-same (object) 
was he sent to bind and take them to the chief 
priests. 

?? But Shaol was the more strengthened, and 
moved those Jihudoyee who dwelt at Darmsuk, 
while he showed that this is the Meshiha. 

?3 And when days were many to him there, the 
Jihudoyee wrought treachery against him to kill 
him. 

?4 But their treachery was showed to Shaol, 
which they sought to do to him; and that they 
kept the gates of the city day and night to kill 
him. 


*° Then the disciples set him in a pannier, and 
dismissed him from the wall by night. 
2 And he went to Urishlem, and willed to be 
attached to the disciples. And all of them were 
afraid of him, and believed not that he was a 
disciple. 
? But Bar Naba took him and brought him to 
the apostles, and recounted to them how in the 
way he had seen the Lorp, and what he had 
spoken with him; and how in Darmsuk with 
boldness he had spoken in the name of Jeshu. 
?8 And he went in with them and went out in 
Urishlem. 
*° And he spake in the name of Jeshu with 
boldness, and disputed with those Jinudoyee 
who knew Greek*”; but they were wishful to kill 
him. 
°° And when the brethren knew, they brought 
him by night to Cesarea, and from thence sent 
him to Tarsos. 
31 Nevertheless, in the church which was in 
Jihud, and in Galila, and Shomreen, there was 
peace, while (it) was edified; and going forward 
in the fear of Aloha, and in the consolation of the 
Spirit of Holiness, was multiplied. 
32 And it was that while Shemun itinerated 
among the cities, he went down also to the 
saints who dwelt in Lud the city. 
33 And he found a certain man whose name was 
Ania, who had lain upon a bed paralyzed eight 
years. 
%4 And Shemun said to him, Ania, Jeshu 
Meshiha healeth thee; arise, and make thy bed. 
And instantly he arose. 
3 And all who dwelt in Lud and in Sarona saw 
him, and turned to Aloha. 
°° But there was a certain disciple in Joppa the 
city, whose name was Tabitha. This was rich in 
good works and in alms which she had done. 
But she became afflicted in those days, and 
died. And they washed her and laid her in an 
upper room. 
°° And the disciples heard that Shemun was in 
Lud the city, because it is over against Joppa, 
and they sent to him two men, who should pray 
of him not to delay to come among them. 
°° And Shemun arose and went with them. And 
when he was come, they brought him up to the 
upper room, and assembled (and) stood around 
him all the widows, weeping, and showing him 
those vestments and mantles which Tabitha had 
given them, while living. 
“° But Shemun put forth all the men without, and 
fell upon his knees and prayed; and he turned 


3° Acts 9:28 - Javanith 


towards the corpse and said Tabitha, arise?®. 
And she opened her eyes; and when she beheld 
Shemun, she sat. 

4 And he reached his hand and raised her, and 
called the saints and widows, and gave her to 
them living. 

42 And this was known to all the city, and many 
believed in our Lord. 

“3 And he was in Joppa days not a few, 
sojourning in the house of Shemun the tanner. 


10:1 But in Cesarea was a certain man, a 
centurion, whose name was Cornelius, of the 
cohort which was called the Italic. 

? And he was just, and feared Aloha, he and all 
his house: he did much alms among the people, 
and in all time prayed of Aloha. 

3 This saw an angel of Aloha in a vision 
manifestly about the ninth hour of the day, who 
came in to him, and said to him, Cornelius! 

“ And he beheld him, and feared, and said, 
What, my Lord? And the angel said to him, Thy 
prayers and thy alms have ascended for a 
memorial before Aloha. 

And now send men to Joppa the city, and 
bring Shemun who is called Kipha: 

ê behold, he sojourneth in the house of Shemun 
the tanner, which is hard by the sea. 

7 And when the angel who had spoken with him 
had gone, he called two from the sons of his 
house, and a certain soldier who feared Aloha 
(and) who was obedient to him; 

2 and he made known to them every thing he 
had seen, and sent them to Joppa. 

* And the day after while they went on the way, 
and drew nigh to the city, Shemun ascended to 
the roof to pray, at the sixth hour. 

10 And he hungered, and desired to eat: and 
while they were preparing for him, there fell 
upon him an entrancement, 

" and he saw the heavens opened, anda 
certain vessel bound at the four corners, and like 
to a great sheet, and it was let down from 
heaven upon the earth: 

and in it were all animals of four feet, and 
reptiles of the earth, and fowls of the heaven. 

13 And a voice came to him, which said, 
Shemun, arise, slay, and eat. 

14 And Shemun said, Not so, my Lord: for never 
have | eaten any thing that is profane?” and 
unclean. 


303 Acts 9:40 - Tabitha Kumi 


304 Acts 10:14 — Or, polluted 


15 And again the second time was to him, Those 
(things) which Aloha cleanseth make not thou 
profane*™. 

16 This was three times done: and the vessel 
was elevated to heaven. 

17 And while Shemun wondered in himself for 
what (was) the vision he had seen, those men 
came who had been sent by Cornelius, and 
inquired for the house where Shemun 
sojourned, and they came and stood at the gate 
of the court. 

18 And they called there, and inquired, whether 
Shemun who was called Kipha there sojourned. 

19 And while Shemun thought on the vision, the 
Spirit said to him, Behold, three men seek thee: 
? arise, descend and go with them, not being 
divided in thy mind: for | have sent them. 

*' Then Shemun descended to those men, and 
said to them, | am he whom you seek: what is 
the occasion on which you have come? 

They said to him, A certain man whose name 
is Cornelius, a centurion, who feareth Aloha, and 
of whom all the people of the Jinudoyee give 
witness, hath been told in a vision by an holy 
angel to send and bring thee to his house, and 
to hear words from thee. 

?3 And Shemun brought them in, and received 
them while they tarried; and he arose the day 
after, and went forth, and proceeded with them; 
and certain of the brethren of Joppa went with 
them. 

4 And the next day they entered Cesarea: but 
Cornelius was waiting for them, while all the 
sons of his family, and the friends and beloved 
ones whom he had, were assembled with him. 
*° And when Shemun entered Cornelius met 
him, and fell and worshipped at his feet. 
°° And Shemun raised him, and said to him, 
Arise, | also am a man. 

*7 And while speaking with him he entered, and 
found many who had come thither. 

?8 And he said to them, You know that it is not 
lawful for a man a Jihudoya to attach to a foreign 
man who is not a son of his tribe. But me hath 
Aloha showed that | should not declare any man 
unclean or profane. 

*° Wherefore | the more diligently came when 
you sent for me. But | ask you, on what account 
you have sent for me? 
°° And Cornelius said to him, Four days are 
unto this from when, behold, | am fasting; and at 
nine hours, while praying in my house, a certain 
man stood before me clothed in white. 


3° Acts 10:15 — seeb, “defiled” 


31 And he said to me, Cornelius, thy prayer is 
heard, and thy alms have made memorial before 
Aloha. 
32 But send to Joppa the city, and bring Shemun 
who is called Kipha; behold, he abideth in the 
house of Shemun a tanner, which is by the sea; 
and he will come and speak with thee. 
33 And immediately | sent to thee, and thou hast 
well done to have come. And, behold, we are all 
before thee, and desire to hear every thing that 
hath been commanded thee by Aloha. 
34 But Shemun opened his mouth, and said, In 
truth | comprehend that Aloha is no respecter of 
persons: 
°° but in all nations whoever feareth him and 
worketh righteousness is accepted of him. 
°° For (this is) the word which he hath sent to 
the sons of Israel, and hath announced to them 
peace and repose through Jeshu Meshiha,—this 
is the Lorp of all. 
37 And you also know by the word which hath 
been in all Jinud (which began) from Galila after 
the baptism which Juhanon preached, 
concerning Jeshu who was of Natsrath, 
whom Aloha anointed with the Spirit of Holiness 
and with power: he who went about and healed 
those who were worn out with evil, because 
Aloha was with him. 
°° And we are his witnesses of all which he did 
in the land of Jihud and of Urishlem. This (one) 
himself did the Jinudoyee hang upon the tree 
and kill; 
“° and him did Aloha raise up on the third day, 
and gave him to be seen openly; 
si yet not to all the people, but to us who by 
Aloha were chosen to be unto him the 
witnesses, who ate with him and drank after his 
resurrection from among the dead. 

And he commanded us to preach and to 
testify to the people that this is he who hath 
been separated by Aloha (to be) the Judge of 
the living and of the dead. 

“3 And of him all the prophets testify, that 
whoever believeth in his name shall receive 
remission of sins. 

“* And while Shemun spake these words the 
Spirit of Holiness overspread all who heard the 
word. 

45 And the circumcised brethren who had come 
with him were astonished and amazed, because 
upon the Gentiles also the gift of the Spirit of 
Holiness was poured out. 

“6 Eor they heard them speaking with tongues; 
and they magnified Aloha. 

“7 And Shemun said, Can any one forbid waters 
that they should not be baptized, they who, 


behold, have received the Spirit of Holiness as 
well as we? 

“8 Then he commanded them to be baptized in 
the name of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha. And they 
prayed of him to remain with them (certain) 
days. 


11:1 And the apostles and brethren who were in 
Jihud heard that the Gentiles also had received 
the word of Aloha. 

? And when Shemun had gone up to Urishlem, 
they who were of the circumcision contended 
with him, 

? saying, that unto men uncircumcised he had 
entered, and had eaten with them. 

And Shemun put forth in order to say to them, 

° That while praying in Joppa | saw a vision; a 
certain vessel descended which was like to a 
sheet, and bound at the four corners: and it 
came down from heaven and came unto me. 

And gazing at it | beheld in it animals of four 
feet, and reptiles of the earth, and fowls of the 
heaven. 

7 And | heard a voice which said to me, 
Shemun, arise, slay, and eat. 

è And I said, Not so, my Lord; for nothing hath 
entered my mouth that is unclean or profane*”. 
* And again the voice said to me from heaven, 
What Aloha hath cleansed make not thou to be 
polluted. 

10 This was done three times, and every thing 
was taken up into heaven. 

" And at that moment three men, who had 
been sent to me by Cornelius from Cesarea, 
came and stood at the gate of the court where | 
was sojourning. 

12 And the Spirit said to me, Go with them 
without doubting. And there went also with me 
these six brethren, and we entered into the 
man’s house. 

13 And he related to us how he had seen in his 
house an angel, who stood and said to him, 
Send to the city Joppa, and bring Shemun who 
is called Kipha, 

14 and he will speak with thee words by which 
thou wilt be saved, thou and all thy house. 

15 And when | proceeded to speak there, the 
Spirit of Holiness overshadowed them, as upon 
us from the beginning. 

And | remembered the word of our Lord, who 
said, Juhanon baptized you with waters, but you 
shall be baptized with the Spirit of Holiness. 

17 If then Aloha equally hath given the gift to the 
Gentiles who have believed in our Lord Jeshu 


3 Acts 11:8 - polluted and that is defiled 


Meshiha as we, who was I, that | should be 
sufficient to prohibit Aloha? 

18 And when these words they had heard they 
were silent, and they praised Aloha, and said, 
Now also unto the Gentiles Aloha hath given 
repentance unto life. 

13 But they who had been dispersed by the 
tribulation that was concerning Estephanos went 
unto Punika, also to the region of Kypros and to 
Antiokia, but with any one not speaking the word 
unless only with the Jihudoyee. 

20 But of them were men of Kypros and of 
Kyrine; these entered into Antiokia, and 
discoursed with the Javnoyee, and evangelized 
concerning our Lord Jeshu. 

?1 And the hand of the Lorp was with them, and 
many believed, and were converted unto the 
LORD. 

22 And this was heard by the ears of the sons of 
the church which was at Urishlem, and they sent 
Bar Naba to Antiokia. 

?3 And when he came thither, and beheld the 
grace of Aloha, he rejoiced, and entreated them 
with all their heart to cleave to our Lord. 

For he was a good man, and full of the Spirit 
of Holiness and of faith, and there was added 
much people to our Lord. 

*° And he went forth to Tarsos to seek for 
Shaol; 

2 and when he had found him he brought him 
with him to Antiokia. And a whole year together 
they assembled in the church, and taught much 
people: from thence first in Antiokia the disciples 
were called Christianee. 

*7 And in those days there came from Urishlem 
thither prophets. 

28 And one of them arose whose name was 
Agabos: and he made known to them by the 
Spirit that a great famine would be in all the 
land. And that famine was in the days of 
Claudios Caesar. 

*° Therefore the disciples, according as each of 
them had, determined to send for the service of 
those brethren who dwelt in Jihud; 

and they sent by the hand of Bar Naba and 
Shaol to the presbyters who were there. 


12:1 But at that time Herodes the king, he who 
was surnamed Agripos, stretched forth hands 
upon some who were in the church, to ill-treat 
them. 

? And he killed with the sword Jakub the brother 
of Juhanon. 

3 And when he saw that this pleased the 
Jihudoyee, he added to apprehend also Shemun 


Kipha. And they were the days of the 
Phatiree®”, 

“ And he apprehended him and cast him into 
the house of the bound, and delivered him to 
sixteen soldiers to keep him, that after the 
Petscha he might deliver him to the people of 
the Jinudoyee. 

° And while Shemun was kept in the house of 
the bound, constant prayer was offered by the 
church on his behalf unto Aloha. 

ê And in that night of the coming morning when 
he should be delivered up, while Shemun slept 
between two soldiers, and bound with two 
chains, and the others were watching the gates 
of the house of the bound, 

7 the angel of the Lorp stood over him, and light 
shined in all the house. And he smote him on his 
side, and said to him, Arise quickly. And the 
chains fell from his hands. 

è And the angel said to him, Bind thy loins, and 
put on thy sandals. And he did so. And again he 
said to him, Wrap thy mantle, and come after 
me. 

? And he went forth, and came after him; not 
knowing that what was done by the hand of the 
angel was reality, for he thought that he saw a 
vision. 

10 And when he had passed the first and second 
guard, they came to the gate of iron, and it was 
opened to them of its own accord”. And when 
they went forth and had passed one street, the 
angel departed from him. 

11 Then acknowledged Shemun, and said, Now 
know | in truth that the Lorp hath sent his angel, 
and hath delivered me from the hand of Herodes 
the king, and from that which the Jinudoyee had 
calculated against me. 

12 And when he had understood, he came to the 
house of Mariam the mother of Juhanon, he who 
is surnamed Markos; because many brethren 
were assembled there and praying. 

13 And he knocked at the gate of the court, and 
there came forth to answer him a damsel whose 
name was Roda. 

14 And she knew the voice of Shemun; and for 
joy she opened not the gate, but returned with 
running, and said to them, Shemun, behold, 
stands at the gate of the court. 

° And they said to her, Thou art altogether 
moved. And she contended that it was so. And 
they said, It may be that it is his angel. 


307 Acts 12:3 — pateera, “Unleavened Bread” 


308 Acts 12:10 - From the will of itself 


16 And Shemun knocked at the gate; and they 
went forth, and seeing him they were 
astonished. 

17 And he beckoned to them with his hand to be 
silent; and entered, and showed them how the 
Lorb had brought him out from the house of the 
bound. And he said to them, Show these to 
Jakub and to the brethren; and he departed and 
went to another place. 

18 And when it was morning there was made a 
great tumult among the soldiers concerning 
Shemun, what was become of him? 

19 But Herodes when he inquired and found him 
not, condemned the guards, and commanded 
that they should die. And he went forth from 
Jihud and came to Cesarea. 

20 And because he was angry with the Tsuroyee 
and with the Tsaidonoyee, they gathered 
together and came to him by persuasion of 
Blestos the chamberlain of the king, and prayed 
of him that peace should be to them, because 
the sustenance of their country was from the 
kingdom of Herodes. 

But upon a public day Herodes was clothed 
with the robe of royalty, and sat upon the 
tribunal, and he discoursed to an assembly. 

7? But all the eople exclaimed, and said, These 
are the words*” of a god®"’, and not of a man. 

?3 And on this account, because he gave not the 
glory to Aloha, in that hour the angel of the Lorp 
smote him, and he was corroded with worms, 
and died. 

*4 And the gospel of Aloha was proclaimed, and 
was great. 

? But Bar Naba and Shaol returned from 
Urishlem to Antiokia after they had 
accomplished their ministry; and they took with 
them Juhanon who was called Markos. 


13:1 But there were in the church of Antiokia 
prophets and teachers, Bar Naba and Shemun 
who was called Niger, and Lukios who was from 
the city of Kyrene, and Manael, a foster-brother 
of Herodes Tetrarka, and Shaol. 

? And as they fasted and supplicated Aloha, the 
Spirit of Holiness said to them, Separate to me 
Shaol and Bar Naba for the work to which | have 
called them. 

3 And after they had fasted and prayed, they 
laid upon them the hand, and dismissed them. 


3 Acts 12:22a - Benoth kolee, "voices" 


Acts 12:22b - b’nat kala d’Eloah “a daughter 
voice of GOD” 


310 


* And they, being sent by the Spirit of Holiness, 
went down to Selukia, and from thence 
proceeded by sea to Cyprus. 

° And when they had entered the city Salamina, 
they preached the word of our Lord in the 
congregations of the Jihudoyee, and Juhanon 
ministered to them. 

ê And when they had itinerated through the 
whole island unto the city Paphos, they found a 
man, a certain sorcerer, a Jinudoya, who was a 
false prophet, whose name was Bar Shuma. 

’ This adhered to a wise man who was 
proconsul, and was called Sergius Paulos. And 
the proconsul called Shaol and Bar Naba and 
requested to hear from them the word of Aloha. 

ê But this sorcerer, Bar Shuma, whose name 
interpreted is Elymos, stood against them, 
because he desired to avert the proconsul from 
faith. 

* But Shaol, he who is called PAULOS, was 
filled with the Spirit of Holiness, and beheld him, 

10 and said, O full of all deceits and all 
wickednesses, thou son of the devil, and 
adversary of all righteousness, ceasest thou not 
to pervert the right ways of the Lord? 

1 And now the hand of the Lor is upon thee, 
and thou shalt be blind, and not see the sun until 
the time. And in the hour there fell upon him 
obscurity and darkness, and he went about 
asking some one to hold him by the hand. 

12 But when the proconsul saw what had been 
done, he wondered, and believed in the doctrine 
of the Lorb. 

13 But Paulos and Bar Naba went on by sea 
from the City Paphos, and came to Perga, a city 
of Pamphylia; and Juhanon separated from 
them, and went to Urishlem. 

14 But they went forth from Perga, and came to 
Antiokia, the city of Pisidia. And they entered the 
synagogue, and sat on the day of shabath. 
1> And after the law and the prophets had been 
read, the presbyters of the synagogue sent to 
them, and said, Men, brethren, have you a word 
of exhortation to say to the people? 

And Paulos arose, and signed with his hand, 
and said to them: Men, sons of Israel, and those 
who fear Aloha, hearken! 

17 The God of this people elected our fathers, 
and exalted and magnified them, when they 
were sojourners in the land of Metsreen, and 
with uplifted arm brought them out therefrom. 

18 And he nourished them in the desert forty 
years. 

19 And he destroyed seven nations in the land of 
Canaan, and gave them their land an 
inheritance. 


2 And four hundred and fifty years he gave 
them judges, until Shamuel the prophet; 

*" and then prayed they for themselves a king; 
and Aloha gave to them Shaol-bar-Kish, a man 
of the tribe of Benjamin, forty years. 

?2 And he took him, and raised unto them David 
the king, and testified of him, and said, | have 
found David, the son of Jeshai, a man according 
to my heart; he will perform all my will. 

?3 Erom the seed of this (man) the God of Israel, 
as he had promised, raised up Jeshu the 
Redeemer. 

*4 And he sent Juhanon to proclaim before his 
coming the baptism of repentance to the whole 
people of Israel. 

?5 And while Juhanon accomplished his 
ministry, he said, Whom think you that | am? | 
am not (he), but, behold, he cometh after me, 
he, the latchet of whose sandals | am not worthy 
to unloose. 

6 Men, brethren, sons of the race of Abraham, 
and they among you who fear Aloha, unto you is 
sent the word of life. 

? For they, the inhabitants of Urishlem and their 
princes, have not consented thereto, nor also to 
the writings of the prophets which are read on 
every shabath; but condemned him, and 
accomplished all that was written. 

?8 And while they found not any cause of death, 
they requested Pilatos that they might kill him. 
*° And when they had fulfilled every thing that 
was written concerning him, they took him from 
the cross, and laid him in a sepulchre. 

3 But Aloha raised him from among the dead. 
31 And he was seen days many by those who 
had come up with him from Galila to Urishlem, 
and they are now his witnesses unto the people. 
32 And we also, behold, we preach to you that 
that promise which was made to our fathers, 

33 behold, Aloha hath fulfilled it to their children, 
(in) that he hath raised up Jeshu; as it is written 
in the second psalm, Thou art my Son; This day 
have | begotten thee. 

34 And thus did Aloha raise him from among the 
dead, that again he should not return thither to 
see corruption; as he had said, | will give you the 
sure grace of David. 

And again he hath said in another place, 
Thou hast not given thy Saint to see corruption. 
°° For David in his generation served the will of 
Aloha, and slept, and was added to his fathers, 
and saw corruption. 

37 But This whom Aloha raised saw no 
corruption. 

38 Know then, brethren, that through This 
himself is preached to you the remission of sins; 


39 and from all (from) which we could not by the 
law of Musha be justified, through this all who 
believe are justified. 

“° Beware, then, lest there come upon you that 
which is written in the prophets: 

* Behold, despisers, and wonder, and perish: 
For a work | work in your days Which you will 
not believe if one should declare it to you. 

“ And when they had gone out from among 
them, they besought of them that the next 
shabath they would speak to them these words. 
43 And when the congregation was dissolved, 
many Jihudoyee went after them; and also the 
proselytes who worshipped Aloha. And they 
discoursed (with) and persuaded them to cleave 
to the grace of Aloha. 

And on the next shabath the whole city 
gathered to hear the word of Aloha. 

° And when the Jihudoyee saw the great 
assemblage, they were filled with envy, and 
arose against the words which Paulos spake, 
and blasphemed. 

But Paulos and Bar Naba said to them 
openly, To you it behoved first to speak the word 
of Aloha; but because you repel it from you, and 
determine against yourselves that you are not 
worthy of eternal life, behold, we turn to the 
Gentiles. 

4 For so hath our Lord commanded, as it is 
written, | have set thee a light to the Gentiles, To 
be for salvation to the ends of the earth. 

“8 And when the Gentiles heard, they rejoiced 
and glorified Aloha; and they believed who were 
disposed*"' unto eternal life. 

4 And the word of Aloha was spoken in all that 
region. 

°° But the Jihudoyee excited the principal men 
of the city and [certain] rich women, who with 
them feared Aloha, and raised a persecution 
against Paulos and against Bar Naba, and cast 
them out from their bounds. 

° And as they went forth, they shook off against 
them the dust of their feet; and they came to 
Ikanon, a city. 

°? And the disciples were filled with joy and with 
the Spirit of Holiness. 


14:1 And they came and entered into the 
synagogue of the Jihudoyee, and so spake with 
them as that many believed of Jihudoyee and of 
Javanoyee. 

? But Jihudoyee, of those who were not 
persuaded, excited the Gentiles to ill-treat the 
brethren. 


311 Acts 13:48 — Or, set unto 


° But they much time were there, and openly 
discoursed concerning the Lord; and He testified 
of the word of his grace by the signs and the 
wonders which he wrought by their hands. 

* And all the society of the city was divided: of 
them some were with the Jinudoyee, and of 
them (some) adhered to the apostles. 

° But there was made a movement by the 
Gentiles and by the Jihudoyee and their chiefs 
to maltreat them, and to crush them with stones. 
ê And when they knew, they passed away, and 
escaped to the cities of Lykania, Lystra, and 
Derbe, and the villages which surround them, 

7 and there evangelized. 

è And a certain man dwelt in the city of Lystra 
who was afflicted in his feet, lame from the 
womb of his mother, (and) who had never 
walked. 

? This heard Paulos discourse. And when 
Paulos saw him, and knew that there was faith 
in him to be saved, 

1° he said to him with a high voice, To thee | 
say, in the name of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha, 
Stand upon thy feet. And leaping, he stood and 
walked. 

1! And the assembly of the people, when they 
saw what Paulos had done, lifted up their voice 
in the language of the country, and said, Gods in 
the likeness of men have come down unto us. 

12 And they named Bar Naba, lord of the 
gods*"*: and Paulos, Hermis, because he was 
foremost in discourse. 

13 And the priest of the lord of the gods, who 
was without the city, brought oxen and garlands 
to the gates of the court of the place where they 
dwelt, and willed to sacrifice to them. 

14 But Bar Naba and Paulos, when they heard, 
rent their garments, and sprang up, and came 
out to the crowd. And they cried, 

15 and said, Men, what do you? We also are 
children of men liable to sufferings like you, 
(and) who preach to you that from these vanities 
you should turn unto Aloha the living, who made 
heaven and earth, and the seas, and all that is in 
them: 

16 who in former generations left all nations to 
walk in ways of their own; 

a yet leaving not himself without witness, while 
he did them good from heaven, and sent down 
rain, and multiplied the fruits in their times, and 
filled with food and gladness their hearts. 

18 And when these they had said, they scarcely 
restrained the people that some one should not 
sacrifice to them. 


322 Acts 14:12 - Mare Alohee 


19 But there came thither Jihudoyee from Ikanon 
and from Antiokia, and stirred up against them 
the people; and they stoned Paulos, and 
dragged him out of the city, because they 
thought that he was dead. 

2 And the disciples gathered to him, and, 
arising, he entered the city. And the day after he 
went forth from thence with Bar Naba, and came 
to Derbe the city. 
=" And when they had preached to the sons of 
the city, they discipled many. And they returned 
and came to Lystra the city, and to Ikanon, and 
to Antiokia, 

*? confirming the souls of the disciples, and 
exhorting them to persevere in the faith. And 
they said to them, that through much tribulation 
it behoveth to enter the kingdom of Aloha. 

?3 And they constituted for them in all the 
churches presbyters, having fasted with them 
and prayed, and commended them to our Lord 
in whom they had believed. 

4 And when they had gone through the country 
of Pisidia, they came to Pamphylia, 

?5 and when they had preached in the city 
Perga the word of the Lorb, they went down to 
Atalia, 
°° and from thence voyaged by sea and came to 
Antiokia, because from thence they had been 
commended to the grace of the Lorp for the 
work which they had accomplished. 

?7 And when all the church had convened, they 
recounted every thing which Aloha had done 
with them, and that he had opened the door of 
the faith unto the Gentiles. 

?8 And much time were they there with the 
disciples. 


15:1 But men from Jihud came down and taught 
the brethren, If you be not circumcised after the 
custom of the law, you cannot be saved. 

? And there were great agitation and disputation 
for Paulos and Bar Naba with them; and it was 
that Paulos and Bar Naba, and others with them, 
went up to the apostles and presbyters who 
were in Urishlem on account of this question. 

3 And conducting, the church dismissed them; 
and they went through all Punika, and also 
among the Shomroyee, declaring the conversion 
of the Gentiles; and they caused great joy unto 
all the brethren. 

“ And when they came to Urishlem, they were 
received by the church, and by the apostles, and 
by the presbyters. And they recounted to them 
how much Aloha had done with them; 

° but (that) certain had arisen who had believed 
from the doctrine of the Pharishee, and said, It 


behoved you to circumcise them, and require 
them to keep the law of Musha. 

ê But the apostles and presbyters assembled to 
consider this doctrine. 

7 And when there had been much investigation, 
Shemun arose, and said to them, Men, brethren, 
you know that from the first days from my mouth 
did Aloha choose that the Gentiles should hear 
the word of the gospel and believe. 

è And Aloha, who knoweth what is in the hearts, 
testified of them, and gave them the Spirit of 
Holiness, as to us. 

And nothing distinguished between us and 
them, because he had purified by faith their 
hearts. 

10 And now why tempt you Aloha, that you 
would lay a yoke upon the necks of the 
disciples, which nor our fathers nor we could 
bear? 

" But by the grace of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha, 
we believe that we shall be saved, as they. 

12 And all the assembly were silent. And they 
listened to Paulos and Bar Naba, who related 
how Aloha had done by their hands signs and 
mighty works among the Gentiles. 

13 And after they were silent, Jakub arose, and 
said, Men, brethren, hear me: 

14 Shemun hath related to you how Aloha hath 
begun to elect from the Gentiles a people to his 
name. 

15 And with this accord the words of the 
prophets; as when it is written, 

16 After these | will return, And raise the dwelling 
of David which hath fallen; And | will build that 
which hath fallen from it, And will raise it up: 

17 That the residue of men may seek the Lorp, 
And all the Gentiles, on whom my name is 
called, Saith the Lord, who doeth all these. 

8 Known from eternity are the works of Aloha. 

19 On this account | say, that we should not 
molest those who from the Gentiles have been 
converted unto Aloha; 

*° but that we send to them, that they shall 
separate from the uncleanness of (idol) sacrifice, 
and from fornication, and from the strangled, 
and from blood. 

" For Musha from former generations in all 
cities hath had preachers in the synagogues 
who on all shabaths read him. 

2 Then the apostles and presbyters, with all the 
church, elected men from them, and sent to 
Antiokia with Paulos and Bar Naba Jihuda, who 
was called Bar Shaba, and Shilo, men who were 
chief among the brethren. 

?3 And they wrote an epistle by their hands, 
thus: The apostles and presbyters and brethren, 


to those who are in Antiokia and in Syria and in 
Cilicia, the brethren who are of the Gentiles; 
peace. 

“ It hath been heard by us, that men from us 
have gone forth and disturbed you with words, 
and have subverted your souls by saying, that 
you should be circumcised and observe the law, 
whom we have not commanded. 

*° On account of this we have deliberated, all 
being assembled, and have chosen men and 
sent them to you, with Paulos and Bar Naba, our 
beloved; 

?° men who have delivered their lives for the 
sake of the name of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha. 
?7 And we have sent with them Jihuda and 
Shilo, that by word they may tell you the same 
things. 

?8 For it hath been the will of the Spirit of 
Holiness, and also of us, not to lay upon you 
greater burden beyond these things which are 
constraining; 

? that you abstain from that which hath been 
sacrificed (to idols), and from blood, and from 
that which is strangled, and from fornication; and 
while you keep yourselves from these, you will 
be well. Be confirmed in our Lord. 
°° Now they who were sent came to Antiokia, 
and they assembled all the people and gave the 
epistle. 

1 And when they had read, they rejoiced and 
were comforted. 

32 And by the word the brethren were the more 
strengthened, and Jihuda and Shilo established 
them because they were prophets also. 

33 And when they had been there a time, the 
brethren dismissed them with peace unto the 
apostes: 


°° But Paulos and Bar Naba remained in 
Antiokia, and taught and preached, with many 
others, the word of Aloha. 
38 And after (certain) days Paulos said to Bar 
Naba, Let us return and visit the brethren in 
every city in which we have preached the word 
of Aloha, and see what they do. 

3 But Bar Naba willed to take Juhanon, he who 
is surnamed Markos. 
38 But Paulos willed not to take him with them, 
because he had forsaken them when they were 
in Pamphylia, and had not come with them. 


313 Acts 15:34 - Some Greek MSS. read here, " 


Notwithstanding, it pleased Silas to abide 
there still." 


°° On account of this contention they separated 
one from the other; and Bar Naba took Markos, 
and they went by sea and came to Cypros. 

“° But Paulos chose for him Shilo, and went 
forth commended by the brethren to the grace of 
Aloha. 

“" And he went through Syria and Cilicia, 
confirming the churches. 


16:1 And he came to Derbe the city, and to 
Lystra. But a certain disciple was there whose 
name was Timotheus, the son of a certain 
Jihudoytha, a believer, and his father an 
Aramoya. 

* And all the disciples who were of Lystra and 
Ikonia testified concerning him. 

3 This Paulos willed to take with him; and he 
took and circumcised him because of the 
Jihudoyee who were in the place; for they all 
knew his father that he was an Aramoya. 

* And when they had gone into the cities they 
preached and instructed them to keep those 
statutes which the apostles and presbyters who 
were in Urishlem had written. 

5 So were the churches confirmed in the faith, 
and multiplied in number every day. 

ê But they went through the countries of Phrygia 
and Galatia; and the Spirit of Holiness forbad 
them, that they should not preach the word of 
Aloha in Asia. 

7 And when they came to the region of Mysia 
they willed to go from thence to Bithynia; and the 
Spirit of Jeshu permitted them not. 

2 And when they had gone forth from Mysia they 

came to the region of Troas. 

? And in a vision of the night, Paulos saw as a 
certain man, a Makedonoia, who stood and 
besought him, saying, Come unto Makedunia 
and help me. 

° But when Paulos had seen this vision, he 
immediately willed to go forth to Makedunia, for 
he understood that our Lord called us to 
evangelize them. 

And we went from Troas and proceeded 
directly to Samuthracia, and from thence the day 
after we came to Neapolis the city, 

? and from thence to Philippos, which is the 
head of Makedunia, and is a colony. But we 
were in that city certain days. 

And we went out on the day of shabath 
without the gate of the city to the bank of the 
river, because there was seen a house of 
prayer; and sitting down we discoursed with the 
women who assembled there. 

14 And a certain female, a seller of purple, who 
feared Aloha, her name was Lydia, of Theatira 


the city, (was there,) whose heart our Lord 
opened, and she heard that which Paulos 
spake. 

15 And she was baptized, she and the sons of 
her house. And she besought us and said, If it 
be that you truly think that | have believed in our 
Lord, come, remain in my house; and she 
constrained us much. 

1€ And it was while we went to the house of 
prayer, a certain damsel met us in whom was a 
spirit of divination, and she had produced her 
lords much gain by her divination. 

And she came after Paulos and after us, and 
cried and said, These men are the servants of 
Aloha the Most High, and announce to us the 
way of salvation. 

18 And this she did many days. And Paulos was 
indignant, and said to that spirit, | command thee 
in the name of Jeshu Meshiha to come out of 
her. And in that hour it came out. 

19 And when her lords saw that the hope of their 
gain had gone from her, they laid hold on Paulos 
and Shilo and drew them to the public place, 

and brought them unto the prefects and to the 
chiefs of the city, and said, These men are 
troubling our city, because they are Jihudoyee, 

and are preaching to us those rites which it is 
not permitted us to receive and perform, 
because we are Rumoyee. 

?2? And a great gathering assembled against 
them. Then the prefects rent their vestments, 
and commanded to scourge them. 

?3 And when they had scourged them much, 
they cast them into the house of the bound, and 
commanded the keeper of the house of the 
bound to keep them watchfully. 

?4 But he, having received this command, 
brought in and shut them in the inner house of 
the house of the bound, and fastened their feet 
in the stocks. 

?5 And in the dividing of the night, Paulos and 
Shilo prayed and glorified Aloha, and the 
chained-ones heard them. 
°° And suddenly there was a great trembling, 
and the foundations of the house of the bound 
trembled, and at once the doors of all were 
opened, and the chains of all were loosened. 

27 And when the keeper of the house of the 
bound awoke, and saw that the doors of the 
house of the bound were open, he took a sword 
and sought to kill himself, because he thought 
that the chained-ones had fled. 

?8 And Paulos cried with a high voice and said 
to him, Do thyself no harm, for we are all here. 


*° And he kindled for himself a lamp, and 
sprang, and came, perturbed, and fell at the feet 
of Paulos and of Shilo: 

3 and he brought them without, and said to 
them, My lords, what behoveth me to do that | 
may be saved? 

31 And they said to him, Believe in our Lord 
Jeshu Meshiha, and thou shalt be saved, and 
thy house. 

32 And they spoke with him the words of the 
Lorb, and with all the sons of his house. 

33 And in the same hour of that night, he took 
and washed them from their stripes, and was 
forthwith baptized, and all the sons of his house. 
34 And he took and brought them up into his 
house, and set for them the table, and exulted, 
he and the sons of his house, in the faith of 
Aloha. 

°° And when it was morning the prefects sent to 
the bearers of rods to say to the chief of the 
house of the bound, Loose those men. 

And when the chief of the house of the bound 
heard, he entered and spoke that word to 
Paulos, that the prefects have sent that you 
might he dismissed; and now go forth (and) 
proceed in peace. 

Paulos saith to him, They scourged us in the 
eyes of the world, (we) being innocent, (and) 
Roman men, and threw us into the house of the 
bound; and now would they bring us forth 
secretly? No, indeed, but they shall come and 
bring us out. 

38 And the bearers of rods went and told the 
prefects these words which had been spoken to 
them. And when they heard that they were 
Rumoyee, they feared. 

3 And they came to them, and besought them 
to come forth and depart from the city. 

“° And when they had gone forth from the house 
of the bound, they entered with Lydia, and there 
saw the brethren, and consoled them. 


17:1 And they went forth and passed by 
Amphipolis and Apolonia, cities, and came to 
Thessalonika, where was a synagogue of the 
Jihudoyee. 
? And Paulos entered, as his custom was, with 
them, and three shabaths spoke to them from 
the scriptures, 

expounding, and showing, That Meshiha was 
to suffer and to rise from the house of the dead, 
and he is Jeshu the Meshiha whom | preach to 
you. 
“ And men of them believed and adhered to 
Paulos and Shilo, and many of the Javnoyee 


who feared Aloha, and distinguished women not 

a few. 

° And the Jihudoyee envied, and joined to them 
evil men from the public place of the city, and 
made a great multitude, and conturbed the city. 
And they came and stood at the house of Jason, 
and demanded that they should bring them out 
from thence and deliver them to the multitude. 

ê And when they could not find them there, they 
drew Jason and the brethren who were there, 
and brought them to the chiefs of the city, crying, 
These are they who have troubled the whole 
land; and behold again have they come here; 

7 and their receiver is this Jason; and all these 
against the commands of Cesar are risen, in 
saying that there is another king, Jeshu. 

è And the chiefs of the city and all the people 
were troubled when they heard these things; 

? and they took pledges from Jason and also 
from the brethren, and then dismissed them. 

1 But the brethren immediately in that night 
dismissed Paulos and Shilo unto Beroa the city; 
and when they were come thither they entered 
into the synagogue of the Jinudoyee: 

for more noble*’* were those Jihudoyee who 
were there than those Jihudoyee who were in 
Thessalonika; and they heard from them the 
word daily with joy, while they decided from the 
scriptures whether these things were so. 

12 And many of them believed, and so also of 
the Javnoyee, men many, and distinguished 
women. 

13 And when those Jihudoyee who were of 
Thessalonika knew that the word of Aloha was 
preached by Paulos in Beroa the city, they came 
there also, and ceased not to move and trouble 
the people. 

14 And the brethren dismissed Paulos that he 
should go down by sea; and Shilo and 
Timotheos remained in that city. 

15 And they who accompanied Paulos came 
[with him] unto Athinos the city; and when they 
departed from the midst of it they took from him 
an epistle to Shilo and Timotheos, that they 
should speedily come to him. 

"© But he, Paulos, while he waited in Athinos, 
was embittered in his spirit, (for he) saw how the 
whole city was filled with idols. 

17 And he spake in the synagogue with the 
Jihudoyee, and with those who worshipped 
Aloha, and in the public place with those who 
met there daily; 

18 and the philosophers also who were of the 
doctrine of Epikuros, and others who were called 


314 Acts 17:11 - Or, free 


Estoiku, disputed with him. And some of them 
said, What willeth this accumulator of words? 
And others said, He preaches foreign gods; 
because Jeshu and his resurrection he 
preached unto them. 

19 And they took him and brought him to the 
house of judgment which is called Arios-pagos, 
saying to him, Can we know what this new 
doctrine is which thou art preaching? 

20 for thou sowest foreign words in our hearing, 
and we desire to know what these things are. 

?1 But all the Athinoyee, and those foreigners 
who are there, of no other thing are careful, but 
to say and to hear something new. 

22 And as Paulos stood on Arios-pagos he said, 
Men of Athinos, | observe you that in all (things) 
you exceed in the worship of demons. 

?3 As | walked about and saw the place of your 
worship, | found a certain altar on which was 
inscribed, To GOD THE HIDDEN: him then 
whom while not known you worship, This | 
declare to you. 

*4 Eor ALOHA who made the world and all that 
is in it, and is himself the Lord of heaven and of 
earth, in temples made with hands resideth not. 
*° Neither is he served by the hands of men, nor 
needeth he any thing, for it is he who giveth to 
every man life and soul. 

*° And of one blood hath he made the whole 
world of men to dwell upon the face of all the 
earth, and he hath distinguished the times by his 
decree, and set the limits of the dwelling of 
mankind, 

*7 that they should seek Aloha and inquire, and 
from his creatures find himself, because he is 
not far from every one of us. 

?8 Eor in him we live, and are moved, and are; 
as also one of your sages hath said, From him is 
our descent. 

*° Men, therefore, whose descent is from Aloha, 
should not think that gold or silver or stone 
sculptured by the art and skill of man is like the 
Divinity”. 

3 Eor the times of error Aloha hath made to 
pass away; and in this time he commandeth all 
men, that every man in every place should 
repent; 

31 because he hath set a day in which he will 
judge the whole earth in righteousness by that 
Man whom he hath ordained; and he will convert 
every man to the faith of him in having raised 
him from among the dead. 

32 And when they heard of resurrection from 
among the dead, (some) of them mocked, and 


315 Acts 17:29 - Alohutha 


(some) of them said, At another time we will 
hear thee concerning this. 

33 And so Paulos went forth from among them. 
34 And certain of them adhered to him and 
believed: but one of them was Dionosios of the 
judges of Arios-pagos, and a certain woman 
whose name was Damaris, and others with 
them. 


18:1 And when Paulos had gone forth from 
Athinos, he came unto Kurinthos. 

? And he found there a certain man, a Jihudoya, 
whose name was Akilos, who was from the 
country of Pontos, (and) who at that time had 
come from the country of Italia, himself and 
Priskila his wife, because Klaudios Cesar had 
commanded that all the Jinudoyee should go out 
from Ruma; and he drew near to them: 

3 (and) because he was a son of their art, he 
dwelt with them and wrought with them: but in 
their art they were tentmakers. 

And he discoursed in the synagogue every 
shabath, and persuaded the Jihudoyee and the 
Heathens. 

° And when from Makedunia Shilo and 
Timotheos had come, Paulos was constrained in 
his speech, because the Jihudoyee arose 
against him and blasphemed, while he testified 
to them that Jeshu is the Meshiha. 

ê And he shook his garments and said to them, 
From now | am clean: | go unto the Gentiles. 

7 And he went forth from thence, and entered 
into the house of a man named Titos, who 
worshipped Aloha; and his house adjoined the 
synagogue. 

And Krispos, master of the synagogue, 
believed in our Lord, he and all the sons of his 
house. And many of the Kurinthoyee heard and 
believed in Aloha, and were baptized. 

* And the Lorn said in a vision unto Paulos, 
Fear not, but speak and be not silent; 

10 for I am with thee, and no man can do thee 
harm; and | have much people in this city. 

But he abode a year and six months in 
Kurinthos, and taught them the word of Aloha. 
12 And when Galion was proconsul of Akaia, 
they gathered together against Paulos, and 
brought him before the tribunal, 

saying, This (man) part from the law 
persuadeth men to worship Aloha. 

14 And when Paulos sought to open his mouth 
and speak, Galion said to the Jihudoyee, If it 
were concerning some thing of evil, or of 
wickedness, or of abomination, you would 
complain, O Jihudoyee, it would be proper for 
me to receive you; 


15 but if they be questions concerning language 

and names, and concerning your law, let them 
be known among yourselves; for | am not willing 
to be a judge of these matters. 

16 And he drove them from his tribunal. 

17 And all the Heathens seized Sosthenis the 
presbyter of the synagogue, and beat him before 
the tribunal. And Galion was careless of these. 

18 And when Paulos had been there many days, 
he gave the salutation to the brethren, and 
proceeded by sea to go to Syria: and Priskila 
and Akilos went with him, when he had shaved 
his head at Kankreos, because he had vowed a 
vow. 

19 And they came to Ephesos. And Paulos 
entered the synagogue and discoursed with the 
Jihudoyee; 

20 and they requested of him to tarry with them; 
and he was not willing; 

for he said, It behoveth me faithfully to 
perform the feast which cometh at Urishlem; and 
if Aloha willeth, | will come again to you. 

22 And Akilos and Priskila he left at Ephesos; 
and he voyaged by sea and came to Cesarea: 
and he went up and wished the peace of the 
sons of the church, and went unto Antiokia. 

?3 And when he had been there certain days, he 
went forth and itinerated successively through 
Phrygia and Galatia, confirming all the disciples. 
*4 And a certain man whose name was Apolu, a 
Jihudoya, who was by family of Aleksandria, and 
erudite in speech, and accurate in the scriptures, 
came to Ephesos. 

*° This was discipled in the way of the Lorp, 
and was fervid in spirit, and he spake and taught 
freely concerning Jeshu, while knowing not any 
thing but the baptism of Juhanon. 

6 And he began boldly to speak in the 
synagogue. And when Akilos and Priskila heard 
him, they brought him to their house, and fully 
showed to him the way of the Lorb. 

*7 And when he willed to go to Akaia, the 
brethren were careful of him, and wrote to the 
disciples to receive him. And when he had gone 
he helped much, through grace, all the 
believers. 

?8 For he disputed forcibly against the 
Jinudoyee before the assemblies, while he 
showed from the scriptures concerning Jeshu, 
that he is the Meshiha. 


19:1 And while Apolu was in Kurinthos, Paulos 
itinerated through the upper countries unto 
Ephesos; and he asked those disciples whom 
he found there, 


? Have you received the Spirit of Holiness from 
[the time] that you believed? They answered and 
said to him, It hath not been heard by us 
whether there be the Spirit. 

3 He saith to them, And into what were you 
baptized? They said, Into the baptism of 
Juhanon. 

4 Paulos saith to them, Juhanon baptized the 
people with the baptism of repentance, saying 
that they should believe in him who was coming 
after him, who is Jeshu Meshiha. 

° And when they heard these (words), they were 
baptized in the name of our Lord Jeshu 
Meshiha. 

ê And Paulos laid on them the hand, and the 
Spirit of Holiness came upon them, and they 
spake with tongues, and prophesied. 

But all the men were twelve. 

è And Paulos entered the synagogue, and 
discoursed boldly three months, and persuaded 
concerning the kingdom of Aloha. 

? And men of them were obdurate, and 
contended, and reviled the way of Aloha, before 
the assembly of the people. Then Paulos 
removed and separated from them the disciples, 
and every day discoursed with them in the 
school of a man whose name was Tyranos. 

10 And this was done two years, until all who 
dwelt in Asia, Jinudoyee and Aramoyee, had 
heard the word of the Lorp. 

11 And great power-works wrought Aloha by the 
hand of Paulos; 

12 so that they brought even from the garments 
that were upon his body napkins or wrappings, 
and laid them upon the sick, and the diseases 
went from them; and demons also went forth. 

13 But men, Jihudoyee, also, who went about 
and adjured demons, willed to adjure in the 
name of our Lord Jeshu over those who had 
unclean spirits, saying, We adjure you in the 
name of Jeshu whom Paulos preacheth. 

14 There were seven sons of a man, a certain 
Jihudoya, chief of the priests, whose name was 
Skeva, who did this. 

15 And that evil demon answered and said to 
them, Jeshu | acknowledge, and Paulos | know; 
but who are you? 

1€ And the man in whom was the evil spirit 
sprang upon them, and was strong against 
them, and threw them, and they, naked and 
wounded, fled from that house. 

And this was known to all the Jinudoyee and 
Aramoyee who dwelt in Ephesos: and fear fell 
upon them all, and the name of our Lord Jeshu 
Meshiha was exalted. 


18 And many of those who believed came and 
acknowledged their sins, and confessed 
whatever they had done. 

19 Many also of the magicians collected their 
writings and brought and burned them before all 
men; and they reckoned the price of them, and it 
ascended to silver five myriads. 

20 And thus with great power prevailed and 
increased the faith of Aloha. 
=" But when these were fulfilled, Paulos set in 
his mind to itinerate throughout all Makedunia 
and Akaia, and to go into Urishlem. And he said, 
When I shall have gone thither, it behoveth me 
Ruma also to see. 

2? And he sent two men of those who ministered 
to him to Makedunia, Timotheos and Aristos; but 
he remained a time in Asia. 

?3 But there was made at that time a great 
tumult on account of the way of Aloha. 

For there was a certain worker of silver there 
whose name was Dimitrios, who made shrines 
of silver of Artemis, and he produced for the 
sons of his art great gains. 

This (man) assembled all the sons of his art 
and those who wrought with them, and said to 
them, Men, you know that all our merchandise is 
from this work; 

*° and you also hear and see, that not only the 
sons of Ephesos, but also many of all Asia, this 
Paulos persuadeth, and hath perverted them, 
saying, that there be no gods which by the 
hands of men are made. 

*7 And not only is this business defamed and 
brought to an end, but also the temple of 
Artemis the great goddess is reputed as nothing, 
and she also, the goddess of all Asia, and 
(whom) all the nations worship, is despised. 

28 And when they heard these (words) they 
were filled with wrath; and they cried, and said, 
Great is Artemis of the Ephesoyee. 

*° And the whole city was perturbed, and they 
ran together and came to the theatre; and 
seizing, they led with them Gaios and Aristarkos, 
men of Makedunia, companions of Paulos. 

3 And Paulos willed to enter the theatre, and 
the disciples restrained him. 

And the chiefs of Asia, because they were his 
friends, sent, praying of him not to deliver 
himself by going into the theatre. 

32 But the crowd who were in the theatre were 
greatly commoved, and others cried other 
things; for many of them knew not on what 
account they were assembled. 


316 Acts 19:31 - Or, give his life 


33 But the people of the Jinudoyee who were 
there appointed of them a man a Jihudoya, 
whose name was Aleksandros; and when he 
stood (forth) he signed that he would apologize 
to the people. 

34 And when they knew that he was a Jihudoya, 
all of them cried with one voice, as two hours, 
Great is Artemis of the Ephesoyee! 

°° And the chief of the city stilled them, saying, 
Men, Ephesoyee, who is there of mankind who 
knoweth not that the city of the Ephesoyee is a 
votaress of the great Artemis, and of her image 
which descended from heaven? 

°° Therefore, since no man can contradict this, it 
behoves you to be silent, and to do nothing in 
haste. 

37 Yet have you brought these men who have 
neither spoiled temples nor blasohemed our 
goddess. Shoe cud l 

But if this Dimitrios and the sons of his craft 
have strife with any man, behold, the proconsul 
is in the city, (and) there are officers: let them go 
nigh and judge one with another. 
°° And if you require other (procedure), in the 
place which is given by the law for an assembly 
it shall be resolved. 

For now also are we standing in peril of being 
accused as disturbers, because we cannot 
make excuse for the concourse of this day, 
inasmuch as we have met uselessly, and have 
made a tumult without cause. 

41 And when these he had said, he dissolved 
the assembly. 


20:1 And after the tumult had stilled, Paulos 
called the disciples and consoled them and 
kissed them, and going forth went unto 
Makedunia. 

? And when he had itinerated those regions, and 
had consoled them with many words he came 
into the country of Hales?” , 

? and was there three months. But the 
Jihudoyee wrought treachery against him, when 
he was about to go into Syria, and had thought 
to return into Makedunia. 

“ And (there) went forth with him into Asia 
Supatros who was from Berula, the city; and 
Aristarkos and Sakundos, who (were) from 
Thessalonika; and Gaios, who was from Derbe 
the city; and Timotheos, who was from Lystra; 
and from Asia, Tukikos and Trophimos. 

° These went before us, and waited for us in 
Troas. 


37 Acts 20:2 - Quasi dicat, HELLAS, Greece 


ê But we went forth from Philipos, a city of the 
Makedunoyee, after the days of the Phatiree, 
and voyaged by sea and came to Troas in five 
days, and there were we seven days. 

7 And on the first day in the week, when we 
were assembled to break the eucharist, Paulos 
discoursed with them, because the day following 
he was to depart; and he prolonged his 
discourse until the dividing of the night. 

2 And there were many lamps of fire in the high- 
room*'® where we were assembled. 

? And a certain youth whose name was Eutikos 
sat in a window and heard. And he had sunk into 
a heavy sleep while Paulos prolonged his 
discourse, and in his sleep he fell from the third 
floor, and was taken up as dead. 

° And Paulos descended, and fell upon him 
and embraced him, and said, Be not agitated, 
for his life is in him. 

When he had gone up, he broke bread and 
tasted, speaking with them until the morning 
arose; and then went he forth to proceed by 
land. 

12 And they brought the young man alive, and 
rejoiced over him greatly. 

13 But we went down to the ship, and voyaged 
to the port"? of Thesos, because there we were 
to receive Paulos, for thus he had instructed us, 
while he himself would proceed by land. 

14 But when we had received him from Thesos, 
we took him up into the ship and came to 
Mitylene. 

15 And from thence the day after we voyaged 
over against Kios the island, and again the day 
after we came to Samos; and we tarried at 
Trogalium, and the day after we came to Militos: 

16 for Paulos had decided with himself to pass 
by Ephesos, that he might not be hindered 
there, because he hastened, that, if it were 
possible, on the day of the Pentecost in 
Urishlem he might work. 

7 And from Militos he sent to bring the 
presbyters of the church of Ephesos; 

and when they came to him, he said to them: 
You know, that from the first day that | entered 
Asia, how | was with you all time, 

1 serving Aloha in much lowliness and with 
tears, and in those temptations which passed 
upon me through the devices of the Jihudoyee. 


318 Acts 20:8 - B'elitho 


Acts 20:13 - Portus. But Tremellius, G. Faber, 
Buxtorf, and Trostius say, Caetus, congregatio. 
Schaaff seems to prefer caetus. 


319 


20 Neither neglected | any thing that was 
profitable for your souls, that | might preach to 
you and teach in public places and in houses, 

?1 while | testified to Jinudoyee and to 
Aramoyee concerning repentance that is toward 
Aloha, and faith which is in our Lord Jeshu 
Meshiha. 

?? And now I, bound in the Spirit, go to 
Urishlem; not Knowing what | shall know in her. 
?3 Nevertheless, the Spirit of Holiness in every 
city testifieth to me and saith, that bonds and 
afflictions are for me. 

?4 But by me my life is reckoned nothing, so that 
| may accomplish my course, and the ministry | 
have received from our Lord Jeshu, to bear 
witness concerning the gospel of the grace of 
Aloha. 

2° And now, | know that again my face you will 
not see, you, all, among whom | have gone 
about, preaching to you the kingdom of Aloha. 
6 | testify to you this very day, that | am pure 
from the blood of you all. 

?” For | have not shunned to make known to you 
all the will of Aloha. 

?8 Take heed therefore to yourselves, and to the 
whole flock over which the Spirit of Holiness 
hath constituted you the bishops; to pasture the 
church of the Meshiha?™ which he hath 
purchased with his blood. 

*° For | know that after | shall have gone, there 
will enter with you furious wolves which will not 
spare the flock. 

° And also from you, of yourselves, will men 
arise speaking perverse things to turn away 
disciples to go after them. 

31 On account of this be watchful, and 
remember, that for three years | ceased not by 
night and by day with tears to instruct every one 
of you. 
32 And now | commend you to Aloha, and to the 
word of his grace, who is able to build you up, 
and to give you an inheritance with all the saints. 
33 Silver, or gold, or raiment have | not coveted; 

and you know to the necessity of myself, and 
of those who are with me, these hands have 
ministered. 
33 And | have shown you every thing, (that) so it 
behoveth to labour, and to be careful of those 
who are infirm, and to remember the word of our 
Lord Jeshu, that he said, He is blessed who 
giveth, more than he who receiveth. 

And when these he had said, he kneeled on 
his Knees and prayed, and all the men with him. 


320 Acts 20:28 — Western Peshitto has “of Aloha” 


37 And there was a great weeping with all of 
them, and they embraced him and kissed him; 
38 but most agonized (were they) by that word 
which he had spoken, that again they were not 
to see his face. And they accompanied him to 
the ship. 


21:1 And we separated from them and voyaged 
directly unto Ko the island, and the day after we 
came to Rodos, and from thence to Patara; 

? and we found there a ship which was going to 
Punike, and we ascended into her and voyaged. 
3 And coming near Kypros the island, we left it 
on the left hand and came unto Syria, and 
thence came we to Tsur: for there was the ship 
to relieve from her burden. 

And having found disciples there, we 
sojourned with them seven days. And these said 
daily unto Paulos in the Spirit, That he should 
not go unto Urishlem. 

° And after those days we departed to go on the 
way. And they accompanied us, all of them, they 
and their wives and their children, till without the 
city, and kneeled upon their knees on the sea 
shore, and prayed. 

And we kissed one another, and we ascended 
to the ship, and they returned to their homes. 

’ But we voyaged from Tsur, and came to Aku 
the city, and gave the salutation to the brethren 
who were there, and abode among them one 
day. 

è And the day after we departed and came to 
Cesarea; and we entered and abode in the 
house of Philipos the preacher, he who was of 
the seven. 

? And he had four virgin daughters who 
prophesied. 

10° And when we had been there many days, 
there came down from Jihud a certain prophet 
whose name was Agabos. 

And he came in to us, and took the loins’- 
girdle of Paulos, and bound his own feet and his 
hands, and said, Thus saith the Spirit of 
Holiness, So the man the master of this girdle 
will the Jinudoyee bind in Urishlem; 

? and they will deliver him into the hands of the 
Gentiles. And when we heard these words, we 
and the sons of the place entreated of him not to 
go unto Urishlem. 

Then answered Paulos and said, What do 
you, weeping and bruising my heart? For not to 
be bound only am | prepared, but also to die in 
Urishlem, for the sake of the name of our Lord 
Jeshu Meshiha. 


14 And when he would not be persuaded by us, 
we desisted, and said, The will of our Lord be 
done. 

13 And after those days we prepared and went 
up to Urishlem. 

18 And there went with us men, disciples, from 
Cesarea, who conducted with them a certain 
brother of the first disciples whose name was 
Mnason, and he was from Kypros, to receive us 
into his house. 

17 And when we were come to Urishlem, the 
brethren received us joyfully. 

18 And the day following we entered with Paulos 
to Jakub, while all the presbyters were with him. 

19 And we gave them salutation®”’. And Paulos 
recounted to them in order what Aloha had done 
among the Gentiles by his ministry. 

2 And when they heard, they glorified Aloha. 
And they said to him, Thou seest, our brother, 
how many myriads there are in Jinud who 
believe, and all of them are zealous for the law. 
?1 But it hath been said to them of thee, that 
thou teachest all the Jinudoyee who are among 
the Gentiles to remove from Musha; telling them 
that they should not circumcise their sons, nor 
walk in the customs of the law. 

” On this account, when they hear that thou art 
come hither, 

?3 do that which we tell thee. We have four men 
who have a vow to be purified. 

?4 Take them, and go, purify with them, and lay 
out upon them the expenses, that they may 
shave their heads; and it will be known to every 
man that what hath been said against thee is 


false, and that thou fulfillest and keepest the law. 


? Concerning those of the Gentiles who 
believe, we wrote that they should keep 
themselves from sacrifices, and from fornication, 
and from the strangled, and from blood. 

?® Then Paul took those men the day after, and 
was purified with them. And he entered and 
went into the temple, making known to them the 
fulfillment of the days of the purification, so that 
an oblation might be offered for each man of 
them. 

?7 And when the seventh day was come the 
Jinudoyee who were from Asia saw him in the 


temple, and stirred up against him all the people. 


And they lifted their hands against him, 

crying out, and saying, Men, sons of Israel, 
help! This is the man who contrary to our people 
teacheth every where, and contrary to the law, 
and against this place. And also Aramoyee hath 


321 Acts 21:19 - Shaloma 


he brought into the temple, and profaned this 
holy place. 

*° For they had before seen with him Trophimus 
the Ephesian in the city, and supposed that with 
Paulos he had entered the temple. 

3 And the whole city was commoved, and all 
the people assembled, and they laid hold of 
Paulos, and dragged him without from the 
temple; and instantly the gates were shut. 

31 And while the multitude sought to kill him, the 
tribune??? of the cohort heard that the whole city 
was agitated. 

32 And forthwith took he a centurion and many 
soldiers and ran upon them; and when they saw 
the tribune and the soldiers, they desisted from 
beating Paulos. 

33 And the tribune drew near and took him, and 
commanded them to bind him with two chains. 
And he asked concerning him who (he was), 
and what he had done? 

34 And men from the crowd cried against him 
variously, and because of their crying he was 
not able to know what was the truth; and he 
commanded that they should lead him to the 
fortress. 

3 And as Paulos came to the stairs the soldiers 
carried him, on account of the violence of the 
people: 

°° for after him was much people; and they 
cried, and said, Away with him! 

37 And as they came to enter into the fortress, 
Paulos himself said to the tribune, May | be 
permitted to speak to the people? But he said to 
him, Javanith knowest thou? 

38 Art thou not that Metsroya who before these 
days stirred up and led forth into the waste four 
thousand men workers of evils? 

°° Paulos said to him, I am a man a Jinudoya 
from Tarsos of Cilicia, an illustrious city in which 
| was born: | pray you permit me to speak to the 
people. 

“° And when he had permitted him, Paulos 
stood upon the stairs, and signed to them with 
his hand; and when they had ceased, he spoke 
to them in Hebrew, and said to them, 


22:1 Brethren and fathers, hear the defence 
which | make to you. 

* And when they heard that Hebrew he was 
speaking with them, the more they ceased; and 
he said to them, 

Slamamana Jihudoya; and I was born in 
Tarsos of Cilicia, but was brought up in this city 
at the feet of Gamaliel, and instructed perfectly 


322 Acts 21:31 - Kiliarka 


in the law of our fathers. And | was zealous for 
Aloha, even as all of you are also. 

* And this way | persecuted unto the death, 
while | bound and delivered to the house of the 
bound both men and women; 

° as the chief of the priests can testify of me, 
and all the elders, that from them | received 
letters to go to the brethren who were in 
Darmsuk, that also them who were there | 
should bring to Urishlem bound, that they might 
be fined. 

ê And as | went, and began to approach 
Darmsuk in the dividing of the day, suddenly 
from heaven there shone upon me a great light, 
7 and | fell upon the earth, and heard a voice, 
which said to me, Shaol, Shaol, why persecutest 
thou me? 

ê But | answered and said, Who art thou, my 
Lord? And he said to me, | am Jeshu Natsroya, 
whom thou persecutest! 

? And the men who were with me saw the light, 
but the voice they understood?” not which 
spake with me. 

10 And I said, What shall | do, my Lord? And he 
said to me, Arise, go into Darmsuk, and there 
shall it be told thee of whatever it is commanded 
thee to do. 

11 And while | could not see because of the 
glory of that light, they who were with me took 
me by my hands, and | entered Darmsuk. 

12 And a man, one Hanania, righteous in the 
law, as the Jinudoyee who were there testified of 
him, 

13 came to me, and said to me, Shaol, my 
brother, open thine eyes. And in a moment my 
eyes were opened, and | beheld him. 

14 And he said to me, The God of our fathers 
hath appointed thee to know his will, and to see 
that Just One, and to hear the voice from his 
lips, 

B that thou mayest be a witness to all men of all 
that thou hast seen and heard. 

16 And now why delayest thou? Arise, baptize, 
and be washed from thy sins, while thou callest 
his Name. 

And being returned, | came hither to 
Urishlem. And | prayed in the temple. 

18 And | saw him in a vision, when he said?” to 
me, Hasten, and remove thee from Urishlem: for 
they will not receive thy testimony concerning 
me. 

19 And | said, My Lord, they know also how | 
delivered to the house of the bound, and smote 
323 Acts 22:9 - Lit. "heard" 


324 Acts 22:18 - Or, saying 


in all the synagogues, those who have believed 
in thee. 

20 And when the blood of thy martyr Estephanos 
was shed, | also stood with them, and fulfilled 
the will of his murderers, and kept the garments 
of them who stoned him. 

?1 And he said to me, Go: for | send thee far 
away to preach to the Gentiles. 

?2 And when they had heard Paulos until this 
word, they lifted up their voice, and cried, Take 
from the earth one like this; for he ought not to 
live. 

?3 And as they shouted and cast their garments 
and threw dust to the heaven, 

?4 the tribune commanded that he should be 
brought into the fortress, and commanded him to 
be questioned by scourging, that he might know 
for what cause they cried against him. 

*° And as they exposed him with thongs, Paulos 
said to the centurion who stood near him, Is it 
allowed you to scourge a Roman man who is not 
condemned? 

6 And when the centurion heard, he 
approached the tribune, and said to him, What 
doest thou? For this is a Roman man. 

*7 And the tribune approached him, and said to 
him, Tell me, art thou a Roman? He said to him, 
Yes. 

?8 The tribune answered, and said to him, | with 
much money purchased the Roman-right*”. 
Paulos said to him, But | was born in it. 

*° And immediately those who had sought to 
scourge him desisted from him; and the tribune 
feared when he learned that he was a Roman, 
because he had bound him. 

3 And the day after he willed to know truly what 
was the accusation which the Jinudoyee brought 
against him. And he ordered him and 
commanded the great priests and all the 
synagogue of their rulers to come; and he took 
Paulos and brought (him) down, and stood him 
among them. 


23:1 And Paulos, looking upon their assembly, 
said, Men, brethren, | in all good conscience 
have conversed before Aloha, unto this day. 
And Hanania the priest commanded them who 
stood by him to smite Paulos upon his mouth. 
3 And Paulos said to him, It will be that Aloha 
will smite thee, (thou) whitened wall: thou sittest 
to judge me according to the law, while thou 
transgressest the law, and commandest that 
they smite me! 


325 Acts 22:28 - Rumoiutha 


* And they who stood there said to him, The 
priest of Aloha revilest thou? 

° Paulos said to them, | knew not, my brethren, 
that he is the priest; for it is written, Of the chief 
of thy people thou shalt not speak evil. 

ê And when Paulos knew that (part) of the 
people were of the Zadukoyee and (part) of it of 
the Pharishee, he cried in the assembly, Men, 
my brethren, | am a Pharisha, the son of 
Pharishee; and for the hope of the resurrection 
of the dead am | judged. 

7 And when he had said this, the Pharishee and 
the Zadukoyee fell on one another, and the 
people was divided. 

8 For the Zadukoyee say that there is no 
resurrection, nor angels, nor spirit; but the 
Pharishee confess all these. 

* And there was made a great noise. And 
certain sophree of the choice of the Pharishee 
arose and contended with them, and said, We 
have not found any thing of evil in this man; but 
if a spirit or an angel hath spoken with him, what 
is there in this? 

° And when there was a great commotion 
among them, the tribune feared lest they should 
tear Paulos in pieces, and he sent to the 
Rumoyee to come and carry him away from the 
midst of them, and take him into the fortress. 

11 And when it was night our Lord appeared 
unto Paulos, and said to him, Be strong: for as 
thou hast testified of me in Urishlem, so is it to 
be that thou also in Ruma shalt testify. 

12 And when it became morning, men of the 
Jihudoyee gathered and bound a vow?”® upon 
themselves, that they would not eat or drink till 
they had killed Paulos. 

13 But there were of those who established by 
oath this compact more than forty men. 

14 and they drew nigh to the priests and to the 
elders, and said, A vow we have vowed upon 
us, that nothing will we taste until we have killed 
Paulos. 

15 And now do you and the princes of the 
synagogue request from the tribune to bring him 
to you, as if you sought to investigate more truly 
his work, and we are prepared to kill him while 
he shall come to you. 

16 And the son of the sister of Paulos heard this 
plot, and he entered the fortress and informed 
Paulos. 

17 And Paulos sent (and) called one of the 
centurions, and said to him, Bring this youth to 
the tribune, for he has somewhat to tell him. 


326 Acts 23:12 - Cherem 


18 And the centurion conducted the youth, and 
introduced him to the tribune, and said, Paulos 
the prisoner called me, and requested of me to 
bring this youth to thee, because he hath 
somewhat to tell thee. 

19 And the tribune took the youth by his hand, 
and led him on one side, and asked him, What 
hast thou to tell me? 

2 And the youth said to him, The Jihudoyee 
have determined to request of thee to send 
down Paulos, to-morrow, to their synagogue, as 
if willing to learn somewhat more from him: 

?1 thou therefore yield not to them; for, behold, 
more than forty men of them watch for him in 
ambush, and have bound a curse upon 
themselves, that they will neither eat nor drink till 
they have killed him: and, behold, they are 
ready, and wait thy promise. 

”? And the tribune dismissed the youth, when he 
had admonished him, Let no man know that 
these thou hast informed me. 

?3 And he called two centurions, and said to 
them, Go, prepare two hundred Romans to go to 
Cesarea, and seventy horsemen and right- 
handed spearmen two hundred, to go forth at 
the third hour of the night; 

%4 but provide also a beast to carry Paulos, and 
escape to Felix the governor. 

*° And he wrote a letter, and gave it to them, 
which was thus:°” 

*® Klaudios Lusios unto Felix the victorious 
governor, peace. 

The Jihudoyee had seized this man to kill 
him; and | arose with the Romans and rescued 
him, when I had learned that he is a Roman. 

“8 And when I sought to know the occasion of 
which they accused him, | brought him down to 
their synagogue. 

*° And | found that concerning questions of their 
law they accused him; and a cause worthy of 
bonds or of death was not in him. 

3° And when it was told me of the treachery of a 
plot which the Jinudoyee wrought against him, | 
straightway sent him to thee; and | have 
commanded his accusers to come and speak 
with him before thee. Farewell. 

31 Then the Rumoyee, as they had been 
commanded, took Paulos by night, and brought 
him to Antipatros the city; 

32 and the day after the horsemen sent away 
their foot-companions to return to the fortress. 


327 Acts 23:25 - Verse 25 is non-existant. 


Khabouris and 1905 Peshitta contain Verse 25 


33 And they came to Cesarea. And they gave 
the letter to the governor, and made Paulos 
stand before him. 

34 And when he had read the letter, he asked 
him from what province he was. And when he 
had heard that (he was) from Cilicia, 

35 he said to him, | will hear thee when thy 
accusers have come. And he commanded that 
they should keep him in the pretorium of 
Herodes. 


24:1 And after five days Hanania the great priest 
came down with the elders, and with Tartelos a 
rhetor, and informed the governor against 
Paulos. 

? And being called, Tartelos came forth to 
accuse him, and said, For many years have we 
dwelt (in peace) through thee, and many 
reformations have been made for this people in 
the bearing of thy office; 

and all we in every place receive thy bounty, 
victorious Felix. 

* But, not to weary thee with many (words), | 
pray thee to hear our humbleness with brevity. 
For we have found this man to be a destroyer, 
and an exciter of agitation among all the 
Jihudoyee, and in all the land: for he is a chief of 
the doctrine of the Natsroyee, 
ê and he willed to pollute our temple; and having 
apprehended him, we sought to judge him 
according to our law; 
’ but Lusios the tribune came, and with great 
force transferred him from our hands, and hath 
sent him unto thee, 
è and commanded his accusers to come to 
thee; and thou canst by questioning him learn 
from him concerning all these things of which we 
accuse him. 
? The Jinudoyee themselves also contended 
against him, saying, that so these things were. 
And the governor signed to Paulos to speak. 
And Paulos answered, and said, For many years 
| Know that thou hast been the judge of this 
people, and on this account | joyfully make 
defence for myself; 

1 while thou shouldst know that it hath not been 
more than twelve days since | went up to 
Urishlem to worship. 

12 Neither found they me speaking with any man 
in the temple, neither have | gathered an 
assembly in their synagogue nor in the city; 

13 nor is it in their power to demonstrate before 
thee any thing of what they accuse me. 

14 Nevertheless, this do | confess, that in that 
very doctrine of which they speak, in it serve | 


the God of my fathers, believing in all that is 
written in the law and in the prophets, 

15 and having hope in Aloha [for] that which they 
also hope: that there shall be a resurrection from 
the house of the dead, of the just and of the evil. 

16 Because of this also | labour to have a good 
conscience before Aloha and before men, 
continually. 

1 But after many years | came to the sons of 
my people to bestow alms, and to present an 
oblation. 

18 And these found me in the temple being 
purified, not with a concourse nor with tumult; 
but men Jihudoyee who had come from Asia 
raised a tumult; 

? (and) these it behoved to stand with me 
before thee, and to accuse of that whatever they 
have (against me). 

20 Or let these themselves declare, what crime 
they found in me, when | stood before their 
assembly, 

71 unless for this one word which I proclaimed 
while standing in the midst of them, For the 
resurrection of the dead am | judged this day 
before you. 

*? But Felix, because he knew this way fully, 
delayed them, saying, When the tribune comes | 
will hear between you. 

?3 And he commanded the centurion to keep 
Paulos in quietude, and that none of his 
acquaintances should be hindered from 
ministering to him. 

*4 And after a few days Felix, and Drusilla his 
wife, who was a Jihudoytha, sent and called 
Paulos, and they heard from him concerning the 
faith of the Meshiha. 

*° And as he discoursed with them of 
righteousness, and of holiness, and of the 
judgment which is to come, Felix was filled with 
fear, and he said, Now go, and when | have 
opportunity??? | will send for thee. 

*° For he hoped that a bribe would be given him 
by Paulos, and on this account he continually 
sent to bring him, and to speak with him. 

27 And when two years were fulfilled to him, 
another governor came in his place, who was 
called Porcios Festos. But Felix, as to doa 
favour to the Jihudoyee, left Paulos bound. 


25:1 And when Festos came to Cesarea, after 
three days he went up to Urishlem. 

? And the chief priest and elders showed him 
concerning Paulos, 


328 Acts 24:25 — Or, place 


? and besought from him, asking of him this 
favour, that he would bring him to Urishlem, 
while they would act treacherously in the way by 
killing him. 

* And Festos returned the word, That Paulos 
was kept in Cesarea, and | am hastening to 
proceed; 

° let those therefore of you who are able, go 
down with us, and accuse him of whatever guilt 
there is in the man. 

ê And when he had been there eight days or 
ten, he went down to Cesarea. And the day after 
he sat on the tribunal, and commanded to bring 
Paulos. 

7 And when he had come, the Jinudoyee who 
had come down from Urishlem surrounded him, 
and accusations many and hard brought against 
him, which they were not able to prove; 

è while Paulos put forth the mind, that he had 
not offended in any thing, neither against the law 
of the Jinudoyee, nor against the temple, nor 
against Caesar. 

* But Festos, because he willed to accord a 
favour to the Jihudoyee, said to Paulos, Art thou 
willing to go up to Urishlem, and there 
concerning these things to be judged before 
me? 

10 Paulos answered, and said, At the tribunal of 
Caesar stand |. There it is right for me to be 
judged. Not any thing have | transgressed 
against the Jinudoyee, as also thou knowest; 

" and if a crime | have committed, or any thing 
worthy of death, | ask not (to be exempted) from 
death. But, if there be nothing in me of which 
these accuse me, no man shall give me to them 
as a gift. | invoke the appeals of Caesar. 

12 Then Festos, having spoken with the sons of 
his council, said, The appeals of Caesar hast 
thou invoked? To Caesar goest thou. 

13 And when days had been, Agripos the kin 
and Bernike came down to Cesarea to salute 
Festos. 

14 And when they had been with him (some) 
days, Festos recounted to the king the 
judgment?™ of Paulos, saying, A certain man 
has been left bound by Felix; 

15 and when | was at Urishlem, the chief priests 
and elders of the Jihudoyee informed me 
against him, and begged that | would do for 
them judgment against him. 

16 And | told them, it was not the custom of the 
Romans to give any man as a gift to be killed, 
until his adversaries have come and accused 


29 


329 Acts 25:13 - To wish the peace of 


33° Acts 25:14 — Or, cause 


him to his face, and there be given him place to 
defend himself against that of which he is 
accused. 

17 And when | had come hither, without delay, 
the day after | sat on the tribunal, and 
commanded to bring the man to me. 

18 And his accusers stood up with him, but could 
not find any evil accusation to prove against him, 
(such) as | had expected, 

19 but (had) various questions with him 
regarding their worship, and concerning Jeshu, 
a man who was dead, of whom Paulos said that 
he was alive. 

20 And because | stood not?! upon the 
investigation of these (matters), | said to Paulos, 
Dost thou require to go to Urishlem, and there 
be judged concerning these? 

?1 But he required to be kept unto the judgment 
of Caesar; and | commanded that he should be 
kept until | may send him to Caesar. 

*? And Agripos said, | would hear this man. And 
Festos said, To-morrow thou shalt hear him. 

And the day after came Agripos and Bernike 
with great pomp, and entered the house of 
judgment, with the tribunes and the chiefs of the 
city. And Festos commanded, and Paulos came. 

24 And Festos said, King Agripos, and all men 
who are with us, concerning this man whom you 
see have all the people of the Jinudoyee taken 
me at Urishlem and here, crying, that This ought 
not further to live; 

*° but | perceived not that he had done any 
thing worthy of death. And because he required 
to be reserved for the judgment of Caesar, | 
have commanded that he should be sent. 

*° But (as) | know not what to write of him unto 
Caesar, therefore have | willed to bring him 
before you, and especially before thee, king 
Agripos, that, having inquired into his case, | 
may find what to write. 

*7 For it is not fit when we send a man bound, 
not to record his transgression. 


26:1 And Agripos said to Paulos, It is permitted 
thee to speak for thyself. Then Paulos stretched 
forth his hand and made defence, and said, 

? Of all that | am accused by the Jihudoyee, 
king Agripos, | consider myself happy, that 
before you | (have to) make defence. 

Especially because | know that you are 
conversant with all questions and laws of the 
Jihudoyee; therefore, | pray you with patient 
mind to hear me. 


331 Acts 25:20 - Or, have not been constituted for 


“ For the Jinudoyee themselves—if they would 
testify—know my manners from my youth, which 
were mine from the beginning among my people 
at Urishlem; 

° because they of a long time were assured of 
me, and they know that in the high doctrine of 
the Pharishee | lived. 

ê And now, concerning the hope of the promise 
that was made to our fathers by Aloha, stand l, 
and am judged. 

7 And for this hope (to which) our twelve tribes, 
with diligent prayers by day and night, are 
expecting to come, for this very hope am | 
accused by the Jihudoyee, king Agripos! 

ê What judge you; ought we not to believe that 
Aloha will raise the dead? 

* For I, at the first, proposed in my mind to do 
many things against the name of Jeshu 
Natsroya. 

10 This | also did in Urishlem. And many holy 
ones | cast into the house of the bound, by the 
authority which | had received from the great 
priests; and when they were killed by them, | 
participated with those who condemned them. 

And in every synagogue | was furious against 
them, while | constrained them to blaspheme the 
name of Jeshu; and, being filled with great wrath 
against them, | went forth unto other cities also 
to persecute them. 

12 And while going on this account to Darmsuk, 
with authority and permission from the great 
priests, 

13 at the dividing of the day, in the way, | saw 
from heaven, O king, shining upon me and upon 
all who were with me, a light which (was) more 
excellent than the sun. 

14 And we fell all of us upon the earth; and | 
heard a voice that said to me in Hebrew, Shaol, 
Shaol, why persecutest thou me?*” It is hard to 
thee to kick against the pricks! 

15 And I said, Who art thou, my Lord? And he 
said, | am Jeshu Natsroya, whom thou 
persecutest. 

ê And he said to me, Stand upon thy feet, 
because for this | have appeared to thee, to 
appoint thee a minister and witness of that (for) 
which thou hast seen me, and (for) which thou 
shalt see me. 

17 And | will deliver thee from the people of the 
Jihudoyee, and from the other nations to whom | 
send thee, 


332 Acts 26:14 - Shaol, Shaol, mono 


rodeph ath li? 


18 to open their eyes, that they may turn from 
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan 
unto Aloha, and receive the forgiveness of sins, 
and a lot with the saints through faith, which (is) 
in me. 

19 Wherefore, king Agripos, | withstood not with 
perversity the heavenly vision, 

2 but preached, at first to them who were in 
Darmsuk, and to them who were at Urishlem, 
and in all the districts of Jinud, and also to the 
Gentiles have | preached, that they should 
repent, and turn to Aloha, and do works worthy 
of repentance. 

?1 And for these things the Jihudoyee seized me 
in the temple, and would have killed me; 

2? but Aloha hath helped me until this day; and, 
behold, | stand and testify to the small and to the 
great, yet nothing beyond Musha and the 
prophets do | speak, but those things which they 
said should come to pass; 

?3 that the Meshiha should suffer, and should be 
the chief of the resurrection from the house of 
the dead, and should preach light to the people 
and to the nations. 

* And as Paulos was thus making defence, 
Festos cried with a high voice, Thou art mad, 
Paulos; much learning??? hath made thee mad! 
*° Paulos said to him, | am not mad, victorious 
Festos, but words of truth and righteousness | 
speak. 

ê And king Agripos also, especially, knoweth 
concerning these things; and therefore speak | 
with openness before him; because not one of 
these things | think have been hidden from him; 
for they were not done in secrecy. 

*” Believest thou, king Agripos, the prophets? | 
know that thou believest. 

?8 King Agripos said to him, (Within) a little thou 
persuadest me to become a Christian. 

*° And Paulos said, | would from Aloha that in 
little and in much, not only thou, but also all who 
hear me to-day, were as | am, except these 
bonds. 

3 And the king arose, and the governor, and 
Bernike, and those who sat with them: 

" and when they were removed thence they 
spake one with another, and said, Nothing that 
is worthy of death or of bonds hath this man 
done. 

32 And Agripos said to Festos, This man could 
have been dismissed, if he had not called the 
appeal of Caesar. 


333 Acts 26:24 — Or, many books 


27:1 And Festos commanded concerning him 
that he should be sent unto Caesar in Italia. And 
he delivered Paulos, and other prisoners with 
him, to a certain man, a centurion of the band of 
Sebaste, whose name was Julios. 

? And when he would proceed, we went down to 
a ship which was from Adramantos the city, to 
go to the region of Asia. And Aristarkos, a 
Makedonoya who was of Thessalunike the city, 
entered the ship with us. 

3 And the day after we came to Tsaidon. And 
the centurion behaved with kindness towards 
Paulos, and permitted him to go to his friends 
and be refreshed. 

And from thence we voyaged; and because 
the winds were contrary we made a circuit unto 
Cypros***. 

5 And we went through the sea of Cilicia and of 
Pamphulia, and came to Mura, a city of Lukia. 

And the centurion found there a ship from 
Aleksandria which was going to Italia, and he 
placed us in her. 

And because she sailed heavily, (after) many 
days we had scarce come over against Knidos 
the island, and as the wind did not permit us to 
go directly, we went round by Kreta against 
Salmona the city; 

è and hardly voyaging we passing around it 
came to the place which is called the Fair 
Havens. And it was nigh to the city named Lasia. 
? And we were there much time, until the day*”’ 
when the day of the fast of the Jinudoyee had 
also passed, and there had become danger for 
one to voyage by sea. And Paulos counselled 
them 

10 and said, Men, | perceive that with distress 
and much loss we are to voyage, not only to the 
burden of the ship, but also to our own lives. 

" But the centurion hearkened to the governor 
and to the lord of the ship rather than to the 
counsel of Paulos. 

12 And because that haven was not convenient 
to winter in, many of us desired to proceed 
thence, and if possible to come and winter in a 
certain harbour in Kreta, called Phoniks, and 
which looked to the south. 

And when the wind of the south blew, and we 
thought we could come as we desired, we sailed 
round Kreta. 

14 And after a little there came forth against us a 
blowing of the tempest which is called 
Tuphonikos Euroklidon; 

334 Acts 27:4 - Al Kypros 
Acts 27:9 - Tishri, 10th day : about September 
20th 


335 


15 and the ship was carried away, and could not 
stand against the wind, and we gave her into its 
hand. 

16 And when we had passed a certain isle that is 
called Cyra; we could scarcely take up the boat. 

17 And when we had uplifted her, we girded and 
strengthened the ship. And because we feared 
lest we should fall into the precipitancy of the 
sea, we brought down the sails, and so went 
forward. 

18 And while there rose against us the hard 
tempest, the next day we threw the goods into 
the sea. 

19 And the third day the things of the ship itself 
we cast forth. 

20 And when the storm had held more days, and 
neither the sun was seen, nor the moon, nor 
stars, the hope that we should be saved at all 
was cut off. 

And while no man had taken any food, then 
stood Paulos among them, and said, Men, if you 
had been persuaded by me, you would not have 
voyaged from Kreta, and we should have been 
exempted from loss, and from this distress. 

Yet now | counsel you to be without anxiety; 
for not one of you will perish, but the ship only. 
?3 For in this night there appeared to me the 
angel of Aloha, (of) him whose | am, and whom | 
serve. 

*4 And he said to me, Fear not, Paulos, for thou 
art to stand before Caesar; and, behold, Aloha 
hath given thee the gift of all who voyage with 
thee. 

*° Therefore, men, take courage; for | believe 
Aloha, that so it shall be as he hath told me. 
°° Nevertheless, upon a certain island we have 
to be cast. 

77 And after fourteen days (in) which we had 
wandered and been beaten in the sea of 
Hadrios, in the dividing of the night, the mariners 
thought that we drew nigh to land. 

8 And they cast the lead, and found twenty 
cubits; and again a little they proceeded, and 
found fifteen cubits. 

And fearing lest we should be found in a 
place in which were rocks, they cast forth from 
the hinder part of the ship four anchors, and 
prayed that it would become day. 

But the mariners sought to escape from the 
ship, and lowered from her the boat into the sea, 
on the pretext that they would go in her, and 
bind the ship to the land. 

31 And when Paulos saw, he said to the 
centurion and to the soldiers, If these in the ship 
remain not, you cannot be saved. 


32 Then cut the soldiers the cable of the boat 
from the ship, and let her drive. 

33 But Paulos himself, until it was morning, 
persuaded all of them to take food, saying to 
them, To-day it is fourteen days (in which) from 
danger you have tasted nothing. 

34 Wherefore | beseech you receive meat for the 
establishment of your lives; for a hair of the head 
of one of you will not perish. 

3 And when these he had said, he took bread, 
and praised Aloha before them all, and he broke 
and began to eat. 

°° And they were all comforted, and received 
food. 

37 But we were in the ship two hundred and 
seventy and six souls. 

38 And when they were satisfied with food, they 
lightened the ship, and took up the wheat and 
sent it into the sea. 

And when it was day, the sailors knew not 
what land it was; but they saw along the coast a 
certain inlet of the sea, (into) which they 
purposed if possible to drive the ship. 

“° And they cut the anchors*” from the ship, 
and left them in the sea, and they loosed the 
bands of the oars, and raised a small sail to the 
wind which blew, and went forward to the face of 
the land. 

“ And the ship struck on a high place between 
two depths of the sea, and infixed herself in it; 
and her forepart stood upon it, and was 
immovable, but her afterpart was loosed from 
the violence of the waves. 

42 And the soldiers would have killed the 
prisoners, lest they should cast forth to swim, 
and escape from them; 

“8 and the centurion restrained them from this, 
because he was willing to save Paulos. And 
those who could cast forth to swim he 
commanded to be the first to swim, and to pass 
to the land. 

44 And the rest, on boards, and on other timbers 
of the ship, passed; and thus all of them 
escaped to land. 


28:1 And afterwards we learned that Melita was 
called that island. 
? And the Barbaroyee who dwelt in it many 
kindnesses showed us. And they kindled a fire, 
and called all of us to warm, because there was 
great rain and cold. 

And Paulos took many sticks and placed upon 
the fire; and there came forth a viper from the 
heat of the fire, and bit (him) in his hand. 


336 Acts 27:40 — Sic. 


* And when the Barbaroyee saw it hang upon 
his hand, they said, Perhaps this man is a 
murderer, whom, though he is escaped from the 
sea, justice suffereth not to live. 

° But Paulos shook his hand, and cast the viper 
into the fire, and nothing of evil befell him. 

ê But the Barbaroyee expected that he would 
immediately have swelled and fallen dead upon 
the ground; and when they had for a great while 
expected and saw that nothing of evil befell him, 
they changed their words, and said he was a 

od. 

But there were possessions in that place 
(belonging) to a certain man whose name was 

Publios, who himself was the chief of the island; 
and he cheerfully received us into his house 
three days. 

ê But the father of Publios was ill in a fever, and 
a disease of the bowels. And Paulos went in to 
him, and prayed and laid his hand on him, and 
healed him. 

? And when this was done, the rest also of them 
who were diseased in the island came to him 
and were cured. 

10 And with great honours they honoured us; 
and when we went forth from thence they 
supplied us. 

1! But we went forth after three months and 
voyaged in an Alexandrine ship which had 
wintered at the island; and she had upon her the 
sign of the Twins. 

12 And we came to Sarakosa the city, and 
remained there three days. 

13 And from thence we went round and came to 
Regium the city. And after one day the south 
wind blew, and in two days we came to Putialos, 
a city of Italia. 

14 And we found there brethren, and they 
prayed of us, and we were with them seven 
days, and then went we unto Ruma. 

° And when the brethren who were there 
heard, they came forth to meet us unto the 
street that is called Apios Foros, and unto the 
Three Taverns. And when Paulos saw them he 
thanked Aloha, and was strengthened. 

And we entered Ruma. And the centurion 
allowed Paulos to sojourn where he willed, with 
the soldier, him who guarded him. 

17 And after three days Paulos sent to convoke 
the principal men of the Jihudoyee; and when 
they were assembled, he said to them, Men, 
brethren, I, who in nothing have risen against 
the people, nor the law of our fathers, in bonds 
was delivered from Urishlem into the hands of 
the Rumoyee. 


18 And they who examined me willed to dismiss 
me, because they found not in me any fault 
worthy of death. 

19 And when the Jihudoyee had risen against 
me, | was constrained to call the appeal of 
Caesar; (yet) not as though I had in any thing to 
be the accuser of the sons of my people. 

°° Wherefore | have besought you to come, that 
| might see you, and declare to you these things; 
for on account of the hope of Israel am | bound 
with this chain. 

?1 They said to him, We have not received 
letters concerning thee from Jihud, and none of 
the brethren who have come from Urishlem 
have spoken any thing evil of thee. 

*? But we are willing to hear from thee what it is 
that thou thinkest; for we know that this doctrine 
is by no man received. 

?3 And they appointed him a day; and many 
assembled and came where he sojourned; and 
he explained to them concerning the kingdom of 
Aloha, testifying and persuading them 
concerning Jeshu, from the law of Musha and 
from the prophets, from the morning until the 
evening. 

4 And some of them were persuaded by his 
words, and others were not persuaded. 

*° And they removed from him, while not 
agreeing together. And Paulos said to them this 
word, Well spake the Spirit of Holiness, by the 
mouth of Eshaia the prophet, against your 
fathers, 

?8 saying, Go unto this people, and say unto 
them, Hearing, you will hear and will not 
understand. And you will see, but not discern: 
? Eor stupified is the heart of this people, And 
their hearing they have made heavy, And their 
eyes have they closed, Lest they should see 
with their eyes, And hear with their ears, And 
understand with their hearts, And be turned unto 
me, and | should forgive them. 

?8 Be this therefore known to you, that to the 
Gentiles is sent this redemption, for they will 
also hear it. 


°° And Paulos hired his own house, and was in 
it two years, and received there all those who 
came to him. 

31 And he preached concerning the kingdom of 
Aloha, and taught with confidence concerning 
our Lord Jeshu Meshiha, none forbidding. 


The Epistle of Paulos The Apostle to The Rumoyee 


1:1 Paulos, a servant of Jeshu Meshiha, called, 
and an apostle, who hath been separated unto 
the gospel of Aloha, 

? which from of old he had promised by the 
hand of the prophets, in the holy writings, 

concerning his Son, who was born, according 
to the flesh, of the seed of the house of David, 

* and is known?” (to be) the Son of Aloha by 
power, and by the Holy Spirit, who raised him 
from among the dead, Jeshu Meshiha our Lord: 

° by whom we have received grace and 
apostleship among all nations, that they should 
become obedient unto the faith of his name: 

ê and you also are of them, called in Jeshu 
Meshiha: 

7 To all who are in Ruma, beloved of Aloha, 
called and saints; peace and grace be with you 
from Aloha our Father, and from our Lord Jeshu 
Meshiha. 

ê First, | praise my God through Jeshu Meshiha 
on behalf of you all, that your faith is heard (of) 
in all the world. 

* For a witness unto me is Aloha, whom | serve 
in the spirit in the gospel of his Son, that without 
ceasing at all time | remember you in my 
prayers. 

10 And | pray that from now there may be 
opened unto me the way, by the will of Aloha, to 
come to you. 

" For | greatly desire to see you, and to impart 
to you the gift of the Spirit, that thereby you may 
be established, 

12 and that together we may be comforted by 
your faith and mine. 

13 But | will that you know, my brethren, that 
many times | have willed to come to you, and 
have been hindered until this; that among you 
also | may have fruit as among the rest of the 
nations 
14 of the Javnoyee and Barbaroyee, the wise 
and the foolish, because to every man am | 
obligated to preach; 

15 and so am | urged to evangelize unto you 
also who are in Ruma. 
1€ For I am not ashamed of the gospel, because 
it is the power of Aloha for the salvation of all 
who believe in him, whether of the Jinudoyee 
first, or of the Aramoyee: 


337 Romans 1:4 - Or, acknowledged 


17 for the righteousness of Aloha in it is revealed 
from faith to faith, as it is written, The righteous 
by faith shall live. 

18 For the wrath of Aloha is revealed from 
heaven against all the unrighteousness and 
depravity of the sons of men, who the truth in 
unrighteousness detain. 

Because the knowledge of Aloha is revealed 
in them; for Aloha revealed it in them. 

20 Eor the occult things??? of Aloha from the 
foundations of the world, unto his creatures by 
intelligence are apparent, and his power and his 
Godhead eternal, that they may be without 
excuse. 

21 Eor when they knew Aloha, they did not as 
Aloha glorify him and praise him, but became 
vain in their imaginations, and their heart was 
darkened, that they understood not. 

22 And while thinking in themselves that they 
were wise, they were fools*”’. 

?3 And they changed the glory of Aloha the 
Incorruptible into the likeness of the image of 
corruptible man, and into the likeness of birds 
and of four-footed (beasts) and of reptiles of the 
earth. 

? Because of this Aloha delivered them up to 
the unclean lusts of their hearts, that they would 
debase their bodies among them. 

And they changed the truth of Aloha into a lie, 
and worshipped and served the creatures rather 
than their Creator, to whom be praises and 
blessings for ever and ever. Amen. 
°° Wherefore Aloha delivered them up to 
passions of vileness*””: for their females 
changed the use of their nature, and to what is 
not natural were used. 

“7 And also their males likewise left the natural 
use of their females, and were inflamed with 
concupiscence one with another, and male with 
male wrought shamefulness, and the just 
retribution for their perverseness in themselves 
received. 

*8 And as they did not decide in themselves to 
know Aloha, so did Aloha cause them to be 
delivered up to a mind of vainness, and to do 
what is not fit; 


338 Romans 1:20 - Kasyotheh d'Aloha 


Romans 1:22 - Or, befooled 
Romans 1:26 - khaba d’tzera “diseases that 
disgrace” i.e.- venereal disease 


339 
340 


*° being filled with all wickedness, and 
uncleanness, and rancour, and malice, and 
rapacity, and envy, and murder, and contention, 
and deceit, and evil imaginings, 

3 and murmurings, and slanders, and hating of 
Aloha: vilifiers, inflated ones, boasters, inventors 
of evil things, mindless, disobedient to parents, 
31 (men) to whom a compact is nothing, and 
(who) neither love peace nor (have) mercy in 
them; who, 

32 knowing the judgment of Aloha, that they who 
these things do, unto death are condemned, 
(yet) not only do them, but also participate with 
those who do them. 


2:1 Wherefore thou hast no excuse, O man, who 
judgest thy neighbour; for in that for which thou 
judgest thy neighbour, thou condemnest thyself; 
for in those which thou judgest, thou also art 
conversant. 

And we know what is the judgment of Aloha in 
truth against them who in these things converse. 
But thinkest thou, O man, who judgest them 

who in these converse, while thou also 
conversest in them, that thou wilt escape the 
judgment of Aloha? 

Or upon the riches of his goodness, and upon 
his long-suffering, and upon the space he giveth 
thee, presumest thou? and knowest not that the 
goodness of Aloha unto repentance leadeth 
thee? 

° Yet, through the hardness of thy unrepenting 
heart, layest thou up the treasure of wrath for 
the day of wrath, and the revelation of the just 
judgment of Aloha, 

ê who rendereth to every man according to his 
works. 

7 To them who seek, in perseverance of good 
works, glory and honour and incorruption, he 
giveth eternal life; 

but to them who are rebellious, and obey not 
the truth, but unrighteousness obey, he will 
render wrath and indignation 

and affliction and distress, upon every man 
who worketh evils; to Jinudoyee first, and to 
Aramoyee; 

1 but glory and honour and peace to every one 
who worketh good, to the Jihudoya first, and 
also to the Aramoya; 

for there is no acceptance of faces with 
Aloha. 

12 For they who without the law have sinned, 
without the law also will perish: and they who in 
the law have sinned, by the law will be judged. 


13 For not the hearers of the law are righteous 
before Aloha, but the doers of the law are 
justified. 

14 Eor if the Gentiles, who have not the law, 
from their nature shall perform the law, these, 
while not having the law, unto themselves 
become a law. 

15 And these show the work of law written upon 
their hearts, and their conscience testifieth of 
them, while their reasonings accuse or excuse 
one another; 

16 in the day when Aloha judgeth the secrets 
of men according to my gospel by Jeshu 
Meshiha. 

17 But if thou (who) a Jihudoya art called, and 
reposest on the law, and boastest in Aloha, 

18 because thou knowest his will, and 
distinguishest the things that are fitting, because 
thou art learned from the law; 

and confidest upon thyself that thou art a 
guide of the blind, and a light to those who are in 
darkness, 

2 and an instructor of the wanting-in-mind, and 
a teacher of children, and hast a type of 
knowledge and of truth in the law: 

?1 Thou, then, who teachest others, dost thou 
not teach thyself? and who preachest that men 
should not steal, dost thou steal? 

22 and who sayest they should not commit 
adultery, dost thou commit adultery? And thou 
who condemnest idols, dost thou despoil the 
sanctuary?*"" 

?3 And thou who boastest of the law, in this that 
thou transgressest against the law, Aloha 
himself despisest thou? 

*4 Eor the name of Aloha through you is 
blasphemed among the Gentiles, as it is written. 

*° For circumcision profiteth, if thou accomplish 
the law; but if thou transgress the law, thy 
circumcision is become uncircumsisedness. 

*° But if the uncircumcision shall keep the 
commandment of the law, is not 
uncircumcisedness reckoned to him (as) 
circumcision? 

“7 And the uncircumcision, who by nature 
accomplishes the law, will judge thee, who with 
the scripture and with circumcision, 
transgressest against the law. 

For it is not in outwardness that he is a 
Jihudoya, nor is that which is seen in the flesh 
circumcision: 

*° but he is a Jinudoya who is one in 
inwardness; and circumcision is that which is of 
the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter; 


%1 Romans 2:22 - The house of holiness 


whose praise is not from the sons of men, but 
from Aloha. 


3:1 What then is the excellence of the Jihudoya, 
and what the profit of circumcision? 

? Much in every thing: primarily that they had 
intrusted (to them) the words of Aloha. 

3 For if some of them believed not, would their 
unbelief abolish the faithfulness of Aloha? 

4 Not so: for Aloha is true, and every man a liar; 
as it is written, That thou mayest be just in thy 
words, And triumph when they judge thee. 

° But if our iniquity the righteousness of Aloha 
establisheth, what shall we say? Is Aloha evil, 
who bringeth his wrath? As a man do | speak. 

ê Not so; otherwise how shall Aloha judge the 
world? 

’ For if the truth of Aloha is promoted by my lie 
unto his glory, why then am | judged as a 
sinner? 

8 Or why, as certain blaspheme concerning us, 
affirming that we say, Let us do evil, that good 
may come? they, whose condemnation is 
reserved by justice. 

* What then, have we attained excellence? 
(No.) For before we decided of the Jinudoyee 
and of the Aramoyee that they are all under sin; 
10 as it is written, None is righteous, not one. 

" None understandeth or seeketh Aloha. 

12 All have declined together and are reprobate, 
And there is none that doeth good, not one. 

13 Open sepulchres are their throats, Their 
tongues have deceived, And the venom of asps 
is under their lips. 

14 Their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, 
15 And their feet are swift to shed blood. 

= Crushing and misery are in their ways; 

And the way of peace they have not known: 
18 And the fear of Aloha is not before their eyes. 
19 But we know that whatever the law saith, to 
them who are under the law it saith: that every 
mouth may be shut, and all the world be guilty 
unto Aloha. 

Because by the works of the law no flesh is 
justified before him; for from the law sin is 
known. 
=" But now, without the law the righteousness of 
Aloha is revealed, and the law and the prophets 
(themselves) testify of it. 


?? But the righteousness of Aloha is by faith“ of 


Jeshu Meshiha, unto all and also upon all who 
believe in him. For there is no distinction: 

?3 for all have sinned, and have failed of the 
glory of Aloha; 


342 Romans 3:22 - Lit. "By the hand of faith" 


*4 and all are justified by grace freely, and (that) 
through the redemption which is in Jeshu 
Meshiha, 
*° whom Aloha before ordained (to be) a 
propitiation through faith in his blood for our sins 
which from the first we had sinned, 
*° within the space which Aloha hath given to us 
in his patience, ---unto the manifestation of his 
righteousness which (is) in this time: that he 
might be just, and might justify in righteousness 
him who is in the faith of our Lord Jeshu 
Meshiha. 
? Where, then, is boasting? It is abolished. By 
what law? of works? No, but by the law of faith. 
*8 We comprehend, therefore, that by faith man 
is justified, and not by the works of the law. 
*° Is Aloha of the Jihudoyee only, and not of the 
Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also. 
°° Because one is Aloha, who justifieth the 
circumcision by faith, also the uncircumcision by 
the same faith. 

Do we therefore the law abolish by faith? Not 
so, but the law itself we establish. 


4:1 What then say we of Abraham, the chief of 
the fathers, that he found in the flesh? 

* For if Abraham by works was justified, he had 
cause for boasting; but not with Aloha. 

° For what saith the scripture? That Abraham 
believed Aloha, and he reckoned it to him for 
righteousness. 

“But to him who worketh, his wages are not 
reckoned to him as of favour, but as that which 
is owing to him: 

5 but to him who worketh not, but believeth only 
in him who justifieth sinners, his faith is 
reckoned to him for righteousness. 

ê As also David hath spoken concerning the 
blessedness of the man to whom Aloha 
reckoneth righteousness without works, saying, 
’ Blessed are they whose iniquity is forgiven, 
And whose sins are covered. 

ê Blessed is the man to whom Aloha reckoneth 
not his sin. 

? Is this blessedness, then, upon the 
circumcision (only), or upon the uncircumcision 
(also)? Now we have said, that his faith was 
reckoned to Abraham for righteousness. 

10 When, then, was it reckoned to him? In 
circumcision, or in uncircumcision? It was not in 
circumcision, but in uncircumcision. 

" For he received the sign of circumcision (as) 
a seal of the righteousness of his faith, which 
(was his) in uncircumcision, that he should be 
the father of all them who believe of the 


uncircumcision; that it might be accounted also 
to them for righteousness: 

12 and the father of the circumcision, not of them 
who are of the circumcision only, but of them 
who pursue*’’ the footsteps of the faith of 
uncircumcision of our father Abraham. 

13 For not through the law was the promise unto 
Abraham and to his seed that he should be the 
heir of the world, but through the righteousness 
of faith. 

14 For if they who are of the law were heirs, faith 
would be vain, and the promise be abolished. 

13 For the law is the worker of wrath. For where 
there is no law, there also is no transgression of 
the law. 

16 Therefore it is by faith, which is through 
grace, that we are justified, that the promise 
might be firm unto all his seed; not to that which 
is of the law only, but also to that which is of the 
faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all: 

17 (as it is written, | have ordained thee the 
father of many nations before Aloha, in whom 
thou hast believed, who maketh alive the dead, 
and calleth those who are not as though they 
were:) 

18 and who, without hope, unto hope believed 
that he should be the father of many nations, as 
it is written, that "so shall be thy seed." 

19 Nor was he weak in his faith, while 
considering his body dead, (for he was the son 
of an hundred years,) and the dead womb of 
Sara; 

*° and at the promise of Aloha he wavered not 
as deficient in faith, but was strong in faith, and 
gave glory to Aloha; 

and was sure that what he had promised to 
him Aloha could fulfil. 

?? Wherefore it was reckoned to him for 
righteousness. 

?3 And not for his sake only was this written, that 
his faith was reckoned for righteousness, 

** but for our sake, because it should be 
reckoned to us also who believe in Him who 
hath raised our Lord Jeshu Meshiha from among 
the dead; 

*° who was delivered for our sins, and rose that 
he might justify us. 


5:1 Because, then, we are justified by faith, we 
have peace with Aloha through our Lord Jeshu 
Meshiha. 

? And by him we have been admitted through 
faith into this grace in which we stand, and exult 
in hope of the glory of Aloha. 


33 Romans 4:12 - Or, accomplish, fulfill 


3 And not thus only, but also in afflictions we 
exult; for we know that affliction perfecteth 
patience in us, 

* and patience experience”, and experience 
hope: 
> but hope maketh us not ashamed, because 
the love of Aloha is shed forth upon our hearts 
by the Spirit of Holiness who is given to us. 

ê But if the Meshiha on account of our infirmity 
in this time for the wicked hath died: 

7 _-for hardly for the wicked one dieth; for on 
account of the good one may perhaps dare to 
die. 

8 Nevertheless Aloha hath manifested his love 
for us, in that, when we were sinners, the 
Meshiha for us died: 

? ---how much more, then, shall we be now 
justified through his blood, and by him be 
delivered from wrath? 

For if, while we were adversaries, Aloha was 
reconciled with us through the death of his Son, 
how much more, then, in reconciliation with 

im*“°, shall we be saved by his life? 

" And not thus only, but we also exult in Aloha 
through our Lord Jeshu Meshiha, by whom we 
have now received the reconciliation. 

12 As by one man sin entered into the world, 
and by sin death, so death hath passed upon all 
men through this, that all have sinned. 

13 Eor until the law, sin, while it was in the world, 
was not reckoned sin, because the law was not; 

14 yet death reigned from Adam until Musha on 
them also who had not sinned after the manner 
of the transgression of the law of Adam, who 
was the type of him who was to be. 

15 But not as was the fall, so is the gift; for if, on 
account of the fall of one, many died, how much 
more the grace of Aloha, and his gift, for the 
sake of one man, Jeshu Meshiha, in many will 
abound? 

16 And not as the transgression of one, so is the 
gift; for the judgment that was by one was unto 
condemnation, but the gift (which saves) from 
many sins was unto righteousness. 

17 For if because of the transgression of one 
death was made to reign, much more (shall) 
they who receive the abundance of the grace 
and of the gift and of righteousness, reign in life 
by one, Jeshu Meshiha. 

18 As then on account of the transgression of 
one was the condemnation of all men, so, on 


3 Romans 5:4 - Or, proof, probation 


345 ý $ s i 
Romans 5:10 - Or, in his reconciliation 


account of the righteousness of one shall there 
be acquittal?“ unto the life of all men. 

19 For as on account of the disobedience of one 
man many became sinners, so also on account 
of the obedience of one many became 
righteous. 

2? But the entrance which was of the law, 
(made) sin to increase; and where sin increased, 
there grace hath abounded: 

?1 that as sin hath reigned in death, so grace 
might reign in righteousness unto the life which 
is eternal, by the hand of our Lord Jeshu 
Meshiha. 


6:1 What, then, shall we say, Let us remain in 
sin, that grace may abound? 

? Not so. For how shall they who are dead to 
sin live yet in it? 

3 Or do you not know; that they who have been 
baptized into Jeshu Meshiha, into his death 
have been baptized? 

For we are buried with him by baptism into 
death; that as Jeshu Meshiha arose from among 
the dead by the glory of his Father, so also we in 
a new life shall walk. 

° For if together we have been planted with him 
in the likeness of his death, so also in his 
resurrection shall we be. 
ê For we know that our old man is crucified with 
him, that the body of sin might be abolished, that 
more we should not serve sin. 
’ For he who is dead is set free from sin. 
è If then we are dead with the Meshiha, we 
believe that with him, with the Meshiha, we shall 
live: 
* for we know that the Meshiha rose from 
among the dead, and no more dieth, nor hath 
death dominion over him. 
10 For [as] he who died on account of sin died 
once, and he who liveth liveth unto Aloha; 
11 so also reckon yourselves to be dead unto 
sin, and alive unto Aloha by our Lord Jeshu 
Meshiha. 
12 Let not sin then reign in your dead body, as 
that you may obey the lusts of it: 

nor prepare your members the instruments of 
iniquity unto sin, but prepare yourselves for 
Aloha, as men who from the dead have been 


347 


346 Romans 5:18 - Zokutho, Victoria, innocentia, 
justificatio. Heb. Zakah, Purum fuit, purum 
pronunciavit 

347 Romans 6:2 - Or, by, on account of, sin: the 
particle admitting of either meaning 


made alive, and your members instruments to 
be for the righteousness of Aloha. 

14 For sin shall not rule over you; for you are not 
under law, but under grace. 

15 What, then, shall we sin, because we are not 
under law, but under grace? Not so. 

"© Know you not, that to whomsoever you 
prepare yourselves to obey him unto service, of 
him you are the servants, ---of him whom you 
obey; whether of sin, or of the hearing of the ear 
of righteousness? 

1” But praise to Aloha that you were the 
servants of sin, but have obeyed from the heart 
the form of doctrine to which you have been 
delivered. 

2 And when you were made free from sin, you 
became obedient to righteousness. 

? As among men | speak, because of the 
infirmity of your flesh, that as you have prepared 
your members for the service of uncleanness 
and of iniquity, so also now prepare ye your 
members for the service of righteousness and of 
holiness. 

2 Eor when you were the servants of sin, you 
were free from righteousness. 

?1 And what product*® had you then from that of 
which to-day you are ashamed? For the end of it 
is death. 

2 And now made free from sin, and become 
servants to Aloha, you have holy fruits*”’, of 
which the end is the life of eternity. 

?3 For the wages of sin is death; and the gift of 
Aloha the life of eternity by our Lord Jeshu 
Meshiha. 


7:1 But know you not, my brethren, for to those 
who know the law | speak, that the law has 
authority over a man as long as he liveth? 

? as a woman who is bound in law to her 
husband as long as he liveth; but if her husband 
be dead, she is freed from the law of her 
husband. 

° But if, while her husband lives, she adhere to 
another man, she becometh an adulteress; but if 
her husband shall die, she is freed from the law, 
and is not an adulteress, though she become 
(the wife) of another man. 

And now, my brethren, you also are dead to 
the law, through the body of the Meshiha, that 
you should be married to another, (namely, to) 
him who rose from the dead, that you may 
render fruit unto Aloha. 


348 Romans 6:21 - Odsho 


38 Romans 6:22 - Phiree 


° For while we were in the flesh, the affections 
of sin, which are against the law, wrought 
powerfully in our members to yield fruits unto 
death; 

ê but now we are loosed from the law, and are 
dead to that which held us, that we might serve 
henceforth in the newness of the spirit, and not 
in the oldness of the writing. 

7 What then, say we the law is sin? Not so. But 
sin | had not learned (to know) but by the law: 
for | had not known concupiscence (to be sinful), 
but (by) the law, which hath said, Thou shalt not 
covet. 

è And by this commandment sin found for itself 
an occasion, and completed in me all 
concupiscence. For without the law sin was 
dead. 

* But | was alive without the law formerly: but 
when the commandment came, sin lived, and | 
died. 

'° And that commandment of life was found to 
me (to tend) unto death. 

For sin, by the occasion it found through the 
commandment, deceived me, and thereby killed 
me. 

12 The law therefore is holy, and the 
commandment holy, and just, and good. 

13 The good, then, unto me, unto death was 
made? Not so. But sin, that it might be seen 
what sin is, by the good (law) effected death in 
me, that sin might be the more condemned by 
the commandment. 

14 Eor we know that the law is spiritual;°°° but | 
am carnal, and sold unto sin. 

'S Eor what | work, | know?" not; and not that 
which I will, | do; but what I hate, that | do. 

16 And if the thing that | would not, | do, | 
witness of the law that it is good?”. 

7 But now it is not | who work this, but sin which 
dwelleth in me. 

18 Eor | know that in me, but that is in my flesh, 
good dwelleth not; because to will the good is 
easy to me, but to perform it | find not. 

For the good that | will to do, | do not; but the 
evil that | will not to do, that do I. 

*° And if the thing that I will not | do, it is not | 
who do it, but sin which dwelleth in me. 
=" | find then a law which accordeth with my 
mind, that willeth to do good, because evil is 
near to me. 

2 For | rejoice in the law of Aloha in the interior 
man; 
35° Romans 7:14 - Da-ruch, "Of the spirit." 

31 Romans 7:15 - Or, acknowledge, approve 
32 Romans 7:16 - Shaphir 


?3 but | see another law in my members, which 
warreth against the law of my mind, making me 
captive to the law of sin that is in my members. 
?4 Miserable son of man am I! who will deliver 
me from this body of death? 

25 | give thanks to Aloha! (it is) by the hand of 
our Lord Jeshu Meshiha. Now then, | in my mind 
am the servant of the law of Aloha, but in my 
flesh | am the servant of the law of sin. 


8:1 Hence, there is no condemnation to them 
who do not walk according to the flesh,*°? in 
Jeshu Meshiha. 

* For the law of the Spirit of life, which is in 
Jeshu Meshiha, hath set thee free from the law 
of sin and of death. 

° Because the law was weak through the 
infirmity of the flesh, Aloha sent his Son in the 
likeness of the flesh of sin, on account of sin to 
condemn sin in his flesh; 

“hat the righteousness of the law might in us be 
fulfilled, who walk not in the flesh, but in the 
Spirit. 

° For they who are in the flesh, of that flesh are 
mindful; and they who are of the Spirit, of that 
Spirit are mindful. 

ê For the mind of the flesh is death, and the 
mind of the Spirit life and peace. 

’ Because the mind of the flesh is enmity 
towards Aloha; for to the law of Aloha it is not 
subject, for it cannot be; 

è and they who are in the flesh cannot please 
Aloha. 

* But you are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if 
truly the Spirit of Aloha dwelleth in you. But if a 
man have not the Spirit of the Meshiha, this 
(man) is not his. 

1° And if the Meshiha be in you, the body is 
dead because of sin; but the Spirit is life 
because of righteousness. 

" And if the Spirit of him who raised our Lord 
Jeshu Meshiha from among the dead dwell in 
you, he who raised our Lord Jeshu Meshiha 
from among the dead will also make alive your 
dead bodies, on account of his Spirit who 
dwelleth in you. 

Now, my brethren, we are debtors, not to the 
flesh, that according to the flesh we should walk. 
° For if after the flesh you live, you must die: 
but if, after the Spirit, the habitudes of the body 

you mortify, you live. 

“ For they who by the Spirit of Aloha are led, 
they are the sons of Aloha. 


33 Romans 8:1 - Compare verse 13 with John 3:6-7 


13 For we have not received the spirit of 
servitude again unto fear, but we have received 
the Spirit of the adoption? of sons, by whom we 
cry, Father, our Father! 

16 And the Spirit himself witnesseth with our 
spirit, that we are the sons of Aloha. 

17 And if sons, heirs also; heirs of Aloha, and 
the sons of the inheritance of Jeshu Meshiha. 
For if we suffer with him, with him also shall we 
be glorified. 

18 Eor I consider that the sufferings of this time 
are not equal to that glory which is to be 
revealed in us. 

19 For the whole creation hopeth and waiteth for 
the manifestation of the sons of Aloha. 

2 For the creation hath been subjected to 
vanity, not willingly?™, but on account of him who 
subjected her, upon the hope 

?1 that the creation herself also shall be made 
free from the servitude of corruption into the 
liberty of the glory of the sons of Aloha. 

” For we know that all creatures groan and 
travail until this day; 

and not only they, but we also who have in us 
the first-fruit of the Spirit, groan within ourselves, 
and wait for the adoption, the redemption of our 
bodies. 

*4 Eor in hope we live: but hope that is seen is 
not hope; for if we see it, why hope we for it? 
*° But if we hope for that which is not seen, in 
patience we wait. 

2 So also the Spirit helpeth our infirmity: for 
what to pray for as we ought we know not; but 
the Spirit himself prayeth on our behalf in 
groanings unspoken. 

But he who searcheth the hearts, he knoweth 
the mind of the Spirit, who, according to the will 
of Aloha, prayeth for the saints. 

?8 But we know that those who love Aloha, in 
every thing lie helpeth them for good; them 
whom he set before that they might be called. 

*° And from the first he knew them, and 
signified?” them in the likeness of the image of 
his Son, that he might be the first-born of many 
brethren. 

°° But whom he before signified, them he called: 
and whom he called, them he justified; and 
whom he justified, them he glorified. 


34 Romans 8:15 - Rucho da-simath benayo: The 
Spirit of the constituting of sons 

355 Romans 8:20 - Or, not with her will 

Romans 8:29 - Var'sham enum, Signed, 
designated, notified them 


356 


31 What then shall we say of these? If Aloha be 
for us, who is against us? 
32 And if his Son he spared not, but for all of us 
delivered him up, how will he not with him give 
us all things? 
33 Who is against the chosen of Aloha? Aloha 
justifieth. 
%4 Who condemneth? The Meshiha hath died 
and arisen, and is at the right hand of Aloha, and 
prayeth for us. 
°° Who shall separate us from the love of 
Meshiha? Affliction, or sorrow, or persecution, or 
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or the sword? 
°° As it is written: For thee all the day long are 
we killed, We are reckoned as sheep for the 
slaughter. 
3% But in these we all are victorious by the hand 
of him who hath loved us. 
38 For | am persuaded that neither death, nor 
life, nor angels, nor authorities, nor powers, nor 
things subsisting, nor things to come, 

nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, 
shall be able to separate me?” from the love of 
Aloha which is in our Lord Jeshu Meshiha. 


9:1 | say the truth in Meshiha, and lie not; my 
conscience witnesseth for me in the Spirit of 
Holiness, 
* that | have great grief, and (that) the sorrow of 
my heart ceaseth not. 
3 For I could pray that | myself might be one 
accursed from Meshiha®® instead of my 
brethren and my kinsmen who are in the flesh; 
“who are the sons of Israel, and whose was the 
adoption of sons, and the glory, and the 
covenants, and the law, and the ministry, and 
the promises, 
° and the fathers; and from whom appeared the 
Meshiha in the flesh, who is Aloha over all: his 
be praises and benedictions to the age of ages. 
Amen. 
ê For the word of Aloha hath not really fallen:°°? 
for not all who are of Israel are Israel; 

neither also are they who are of the seed of 
Abraham all children; because it was said, In 
Ishok shall be called unto thee the seed: 
ê but that is, the children of the flesh are not the 
children of Aloha, but the children of the promise 
are reckoned the seed. 
? For the promise is this word, In this time | will 
come, and ason shall be unto Sara. 


37 Romans 8:39 — Eastern Peshitta has “us” 


Romans 9:3 - Cherem from Meshiha 
Romans 9:6 - Fallen to fall 


358 
359 


10 And not this only, but also Raphka when with 
one, our father Ishok, 

" she had association, before her sons were 
born, and had not wrought good or evil, the 
(choice) of Aloha was (made) known before that 
it should remain: not by works, but by him who 
called: 

12 for it was said, The elder shall be servant to 
the less; 

13 as it is written, Jakub have | loved, and Isu 
have | hated. 

14 What then say we? Is there iniquity with 
Aloha? Not so: 

15 behold, also, he said unto Musha, | will have 
mercy upon whom | will have mercy, and | will 
be gracious to whom | will be gracious. 

16 Therefore it is not by him who willeth, nor by 
him who runneth, but by Aloha the Merciful. 

’ For it is said in the scripture to Pherun, For 
this | have raised thee up, that | might show in 
thee my power, and that my name might be 
proclaimed in all the earth. 

Then upon whom he willeth he is merciful, 
and whom he willeth he hardeneth. 

19 Perhaps thou wilt say, Of what then doth he 
complain; for who shall arise against his will? 

° Who then art thou, O man, who givest answer 
against Aloha? Will the mass say to him who 
formeth it, Why thus hast thou formed me? 

7" Or, hath not the potter power over his clay, 
that from the (same) mass he might make 
vessels, the one to honour, and the other to 
vileness? 

*? But if Aloha, willing to reveal his wrath, and to 
make known his power, in his much patience 
bore with the vessels of wrath who were 
perfected for destruction, 

3 and poured his mercy upon the vessels of 
mercy who were prepared of Aloha for glory, 

24 who are we, (ourselves) the called, not only 
of the Jihudoyee, but also of the Gentiles: 

° so also in Husha he said, | will call them my 
people who were not my people, and on those 
on whom | was not merciful, will | be merciful: 
°° for it shall be in the place where they were 
not called my people, there shall they be called 
the children of Aloha the Living. 

? But Eshaia proclaims of the sons of Israel: 
Though the number of the sons of Israel were as 
the sand which is on the sea, the residue of 
them shall be saved. 

?8 The Loro hath decreed and determined the 
word, and will perform it upon the earth. 

*° And as that which Eshaia had said before: 
Unless the Lorp of sebaoth had left to us a 


residue, as Sedum should we have been, and to 
Amura have been likened. 
3° What then shall we say? That the Gentiles 
who have not followed” after righteousness 
have attained righteousness, but that 
righteousness which is of faith: 

but Israel, who followed*”' after the law of 
righteousness, unto the law of righteousness 
have not attained. 
32 For why? Because it was not by faith, but by 
the works of the law: for they stumbled at the 
stone of stumbling; 

° as it is written, Behold, | lay in Zion a stone of 
stumbling And a rock of offence; And whosoever 
in him shall believe Shall not be ashamed. 


10:1 My brethren, (it is) the wish* of my heart, 
and my prayer to Aloha concerning them, that 
they may be saved. 

* For l testify of them that they have zeal for 
Aloha?®, but not in knowledge. 

° But the righteousness of Aloha they know not, 
but seek the righteousness of themselves to 
establish, and on this account to the 
righteousness of Aloha they have not become 
subject. 

“ For the end of the law is the Meshiha unto 
righteousness | in all who believe in him. 

° For Musha thus describeth the righteousness 
which is of the law, that he who doeth these 
things shall live by them. 

ê But the righteousness which is by faith thus 
speaketh, Say not in thy heart, Who shall 
ascend into heaven, And bring down the 
Meshiha? 

7 And who shall descend into the deep of Sheul, 
And bring up the Meshiha from among the 
dead? 

ê But what saith it? Nigh thee is the word of thy 
mouth and of thy heart: that is, the word of faith, 
which we preach. 

? And if thou wilt confess with thy mouth our 
Lord Jeshu, and wilt believe with thy heart that 
Aloha hath raised him from among the dead, 
thou shalt be saved. 

For the heart which believeth in him is 
justified, and the mouth which confesseth him is 
saved. 

" For the scripture saith, that every one who 
believeth in him shall not be ashamed. 


36 Romans 9:30 — Or, followed 


Romans 9:31 — Or, followed 
Romans 10:1 — Or, will 
Romans 10:2 — Or, the zeal of Aloha 


361 
362 
363 


12 And in this lie hath not distinguished nor the 
Jihudoya nor the Aramoya; for one is the LorD 
of them all, who is rich toward every one who 
calleth on him. 

13 For every one who shall invoke the name of 
the Lorp shall be saved. 

14 How then shall they invoke him in whom they 
have not believed? Or how shall they believe in 
him of whom they have not heard? Or how shall 
they hear without a preacher? 

15 Or how shall they preach if they are not sent? 
As it is written, How beautiful the feet of them 
who evangelize peace, And who evangelize 
good things! 

"© But all of them have not obeyed*™ the 
preaching of the gospel: for Eshaia saith, My 
Lord, who hath believed our voice? 

17 Therefore faith is from the hearing of the ear, 
and the hearing of the ear from the word of 
Aloha. 

18 But I say, Have they not heard? Behold, in all 
the earth their voice hath gone forth, And to the 
ends of the world their words! 

19 But I say, Hath not Israel known? First, 
Musha thus speaketh, | will provoke you by a 
people who is not a people, And by the 
disobedient people will | make you angry. 

*° But Eshaia is bold, and saith, | am beheld by 
them who have not sought me, And found of 
them who for me have not inquired. 
=" But of Israel he saith, | have stretched out my 
hands all the day To a contentious and 
disobedient people. 


11:1 But | say, Hath Aloha put away his people? 
Not so. For | also am of Israel, of the seed of 
Abraham, of the tribe of Benyamen. 

? Aloha hath not put away his people whom 
from before he knew. Or know you not what he 
saith in the scripture concerning Elia, when he 
cried unto Aloha against Israel, saying, 

3 My Lord, thy prophets have they killed, and thy 
altars overthrown, and | alone am left, and they 
seek my soul? 

And it was said to him by revelation, Behold, | 
have left to myself seven thousand men, who 
upon their knees have not kneeled nor 
worshipped Baal. 

° So also, at this time, a residue is left by the 
election of grace. 

ê But if by grace, it is not of works; otherwise 
grace is not grace. But if by works, it is not of 
grace; otherwise work is not work. 


3&4 Romans 10:16 - Lit. "heard." 


7 What then, That which Israel sought he hath 
not found; but the election hath found: but the 
rest of them are blinded in their hearts. 

è As it is written, Aloha hath given them the 
spirit of trouble, And eyes that see not, and ears 
that hear not, until the present day.®® 
? And David again saith, Let their table become 
a snare before them, And their reward be for a 
stumbling-block: 

10 Let their eyes be darkened, that they may not 
see, And their back at all times be bowed; 

" But I say, Have they stumbled so as to fall? 
Not so: but, by their stumbling was salvation to 
the Gentiles, unto [the stirring up of] their zeal. 

And if their stumbling were wealth to the 
world, and their condemnation wealth to the 
Gentiles, how much then will their fulness be? 

3 To you, Gentiles, | speak, I, who am apostle 
of the Gentiles, in my ministry | glory?®®, 

if | may provoke my fleshly kindred, and save 
some of them. 

15 For if their rejection was the reconciliation of 
the world, what (will) their conversion (be) but 
life from the dead? 

16 Eor if the first-fruits be holy, (so) also (will be) 
the mass; and if the root be holy, (so) also the 
branches. 

17 And if the branches were cut off, and thou 
who art a wild olive art engrafted in their place, 
and hast a participation of the root and fatness 
of the olive, 

18 boast not against the branches: but if thou 
boast, thou bearest not the root, but the root 
beareth thee. 

19 And perhaps thou wilt say, The branches 
were cut off, and | in their place am engrafted: 
20 Well, they on account of unbelief were cut off, 
and thou by faith standest: be not exalted in thy 
mind, but fear. 

*" lf Aloha spared not them who were branches 
by nature, (take heed) lest he spare not thee. 

?? Behold, then, the goodness and the severity 
of Aloha: towards them who fell, severity; but 
towards thee, goodness, if thou continue in his 
goodness; if not, thou also wilt be cut off. 

And they, if they continue not in their want of 
faith, they also shall be engrafted; for Aloha is 
able again to engraft them. 

For if thou who art of the wild olive which is 
thy nature, wast cut off, and, which was not thy 
nature, art engrafted into the good olive, how 
much more they, if they are engrafted into the 
olive of their nature? 


36° Romans 11:8 - Until the day of to-day 


366 Romans 11:13 — Or, boast 


*° But | would have you know, my brethren, this 
mystery, that you may not be wise in your own 
mind,---that blindness of heart for a little space is 
unto Israel until the fulness of the Gentiles be 
brought in: 

6 and then all Israel shall be saved. As it is 
written, The Redeemer shall come from Sion? , 
And turn iniquity from Jakub; 

?7 And then shall be to them my covenant, 
When I have forgiven them their sins. 

?8 But, in (regard of) the gospel, they are 
enemies on your account; and, in the election, 
they are beloved on account of the fathers. 

*° For Aloha turneth not in his gift and in his 
vocation. 

°° For as you also were not obedient unto Aloha 
at the first, and now have received mercy, 
through their disobedience; 

31 so also these are now disobedient for the 
mercy that is upon you, that upon them also 
might be mercy. 

32 For Aloha hath included them all in 
disobedience, that upon all he might show 
mercy. 

33 O the depth of the riches of the wisdom and 
knowledge of Aloha, whose judgments man 
searcheth not, and whose ways are inscrutable! 
34 Eor who hath known the mind of the LORD, or 
who hath been his counsellor? 

35 Or who hath first giveth to him, that so he 
should receive from him? 

°° For all is of him, and all in him, and all by him. 
To him be praises and benedictions unto the 
age of ages. Amen. 


12:1 | beseech then of you, my brethren, by the 
mercies of Aloha, that you present??? your 
bodies a sacrifice, living and holy and 
acceptable unto Aloha, in a rational®” service. 

? And be not likened unto this world, but be 
changed by the renewing of your minds, that you 
may discern what is the will of Aloha, good, and 
acceptable, and perfect. 

3 But I tell you all through the grace which is 
given to me, that you are not to think beyond 
what it is proper to think; but that you think with 
sobriety, every man as Aloha hath divided to him 
faith in measure. 

“ For as in one body we have many members, 
and as all the members have not one work, 


37 Romans 11:26 - Nithe men Tshiun Poruko 


Romans 12:1a - Or, make to stand, constitute 
Romans 12:1b - Meliltho 


368 
369 


° so also we who are many are one body in the 
Meshiha; but we are each of us members one of 
another. 

ê But we have various gifts according to the 
grace that is given to us: is it prophecy? (let him 
who has received it) prophesy according to the 
measure of the faith. 

7 Hath (another the gift) of ministry? (let him be 
employed) in his ministry; he who is a teacher, 
(let him labour) in his teaching; 

8 he who is an exhorter, in his exhorting; as he 
who giveth, (let him give with simplicity;) and he 
who presideth®””, (let it be) with diligence; and 
he who (is engaged in works) of mercy, with 
cheerfulness. 

And let not your love be guileful; abhor things 
evil, cleave to the good. 
Be tender to your brethren, and love one 
another, being forward to honour one another. 
Be diligent, and not slothful, be fervent in 
spirit, be serving your Lord. 
Rejoice in your hope, sustain your afflictions, 
be constant in prayer; 
distributing to the necessity of the saints. Be 
kind to strangers. 
Bless your persecutors; bless, and curse not. 
Rejoice with them who rejoice, and weep with 
them who weep. 

16 And what you think of yourselves, (that) also 
think of your brethren; nor think with a high 
mind, but incline to them who are humble; and 
be not wise in the conceit of your own mind. 

17 And repay to no man evil for evil, but be 
careful to do good before all men. 

18 And if possible, as much as is in you, with all 
men make peace. 

19 And avenge not yourselves, my beloved, but 
give place unto wrath; for it is written, that if thou 
execute not judgment for thyself, | will execute 
thy judgment, saith Aloha. 
°° And if thy adversary hunger, feed him; and if 
he thirst, give him drink: and if these things thou 
do unto him, coals of fire thou wilt hear upon his 
head. 

2" | et not evil overcome you, but overcome evil 
with good. 


13:1 Let every soul to the powers of dominion 
be subject. For there is no power that is not from 
Aloha, and the powers that be, of Aloha are they 
instituted. 

? Whoever then riseth up against the power, 
against the institution of Aloha he riseth; and 


37 Romans 12:8 - Lit. "standeth at the head. 


they who arise against them will receive 
judgment. 

3 For judges are not a terror to the workers of 
good, but to the evil. Wilt thou then not be afraid 
of the power? do good, and thou shalt have 
praise from him. 

“ For he is the servant of Aloha, but to thee for 
good: and if thou do evil, fear; for not in vain is 
he girded with the sword; for he is the servant of 
Aloha, and the dispenser of wrath to them who 
do evil. 

° And because of this are we bound to be 
subject, not for the wrath only, but also because 
of conscience. 

ê On this account also give we tribute 
them; for they are the servants of Aloha over 
these things constituted. 

’ Render therefore to every man as is due to 
him: to whom tribute (is due,) tribute; and to 
whom custom, custom; and to whom reverence, 
reverence; and to whom honour, honour. 

è And to no man owe any thing, but one another 
to love. For whoever loveth his neighbour 
fulfilleth the law: 

? for that also which it hath said, Thou shalt not 
kill; and, Thou shalt not commit adultery; and, 
Thou shalt not steal; and, Thou shalt not covet; 
and if there be any other commandment, in this 
word it is accomplished, Thou shalt love thy 
neighbour as thyself. 

° Love unto his neighbour evil worketh not: 
therefore love is the fulfilling of the law. 

1 And also this know, that the time is, and the 
hour is, when we should be awake from our 
sleep; for now hath drawn nearer to us our 
salvation than when we believed. 

12 The night now passeth away, and the day 
hath drawn nigh; put we away then from us the 
works of darkness, and let us clothe with the 
arms of light. 

13 And as in the day, let us walk decorously, not 
with the song, nor with drunkenness, nor in the 
unclean chamber, nor in envy and in contention; 

but let (every one) clothe himself with our 

Lord Jeshu Meshiha, and care not for your flesh 
unto the lusts (thereof). 


371 
to 


14:1 But to him who is weak in the faith give the 
hand, and be not divided in your thoughts. 

? For there are some who believe that one may 
eat every thing, and he who is weak eateth 
(only) the herb. 

? But let not him who eateth despise him who 
eateth not; and he who eateth not, let him not 


371 Romans 13:6 - Lit. "head-silver." 


judge him who eateth; for Aloha hath received 
him. 

“Who art thou that judgest a servant who is not 
thine? who, if he stand, unto his Lord he 
standeth, and if he fall, falleth unto his Lord. But 
standing, he standeth; for there is power in the 
hands of his Lord to make him stand. 

° There is who distinguisheth®”* day from day, 
and there is who judgeth all days (to, be alike); 
but let every man in the conviction?” of his 
(own) mind be confirmed. 

ê He who thinketh of the day, to his Lord he 
thinketh; and everyone who thinketh not of the 
day, unto his Lord he thinketh not (of it). He who 
eateth, to his Lord he eateth, and to Aloha giveth 
thanks; and he who eateth not, to his Lord he 
eateth not, and giveth thanks to Aloha. 

’ For there is no one of us who to himself liveth, 
and no one who to himself dieth. 

For if we live, to our Lord we live; and if we 
die, to our Lord we die: and if we live, then, or if 
we die, our Lord’s are we. 

Because of this also the Meshiha died and 
lived and arose, that he might be Lorp of the 
dead and of the living. 

° But thou, why dost thou judge thy brother? Or 
thou, also, why despisest thou thy brother? For 
we shall all stand before the tribunal of the 
Meshiha: 

1 as it is written, As | live, saith the Lorp, unto 
me every knee shall bow, and to me shall every 
tongue confess. 

? Therefore, every one of us the answer for 
himself shall give unto Aloha. 

° Then judge not one another, but this 
determine rather, to lay not a stumbling-block for 
thy brother. 

For | know, and am persuaded in the Lorp 
Jeshu, that a thing which is unclean from itself is 
not (so); but to him who judgeth of any thing that 
it Is polluted, to him only it is polluted. 

° But if on account of meat thou grievest thy 
brother, thou walkest not in love: destroy not by 
thy meat him on account of whom the Meshiha 
died. 

16 Let not our good?” (things) be blasphemed. 

17 For the kingdom of Aloha is not meat and 
drink, but righteousness and peace and joy in 
the Spirit of Holiness. 

2 For who in these things serveth the Meshiha 
pleaseth Aloha, and before men is approved. 


372 Romans 14:5a — Or, Judgeth 


Romans 14:5b - Or, knowledge, intelligence 
Romans 14:16 - Toböthan, plural 


373 
374 


19 Now, after peace let us pursue®”, and after 
the edification of one another, 

2 and not for the sake of meats undo the work 
of Aloha. For each thing is pure, yet evil is it to 
the man who eateth with offence. 

7" It is well not to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor 
any thing by which our brother is offended. 
*? Hast thou confidence? In thyself retain it 
before Aloha. Blessed is he who condemnet 
not himself in what he distinguisheth. 

?3 For he who doubteth and eateth is made 
guilty, because be eateth not with confidence. 
For every thing that is not of confidence is sin. 


376 
h 


15:1 We then, the strong, are obligated to bear 

up the infirmities of the weak, and not ourselves 

to please. 

? But let every one of us please his neighbour in 
ood things as unto edification. 

Because the Meshiha also pleased not 
himself; but as it is written, The reproach of thy 
reproachers hath fallen upon me. 

For every thing that hath before been written 
for our instruction was written, that by the 
patience and consolation of the scriptures we 
might have hope. 

° But the God of patience and of consolation 
give to you that with impartiality?” you may think 
one of another in Jeshu Meshiha, 

ê that with one mind and with one mouth you 
may glorify Aloha, the Father of our Lord Jeshu 
Meshiha. 

’ Therefore, receive and bear with one another, 
as also the Meshiha hath received you, to the 
glory of Aloha. 

But | say that Jeshu Meshiha ministered [to] 
the circumcision, on behalf of the truth of Aloha, 
that he might confirm the promise of the fathers, 
* and the Gentiles might glorify Aloha for his 
mercy that was upon them. As it is written, | will 
confess thee among the Gentiles, And to thy 
name will | sing. 

10 And again he hath said, Be glad, ye Gentiles, 
with his people. 

" And again he hath said, Praise the Lorp, all 
(ye) Gentiles. Let all peoples praise him. 

? And again, Eshaia hath said, There shall be a 
root of Jeshai, And he who shall arise shall be 
the chief of the peoples; And upon him will the 
Gentiles hope. 


375 Romans 14:19 — Or, run 


Romans 14:22 — Or, Judgeth 
Romans 15:5 - Equality 


376 
377 


13 But the God of hope fill you with all joy and 
peace, through faith, that you may abound in 
hope through the power of the Spirit of Holiness. 

14 But I am persuaded also concerning you, my 
brethren, that you are also full of good, and filled 
with all knowledge, and able also to instruct 
others. 

15 But | have somewhat boldly written to you, 
my brethren, as that | may put you in 
remembrance, through the grace which is given 
to me from Aloha, 

16 to be a minister of Jeshu Meshiha among the 
Gentiles, and to labour in the gospel of Aloha, 
that there may be an oblation of the Gentiles, 
acceptable and holy through the Spirit of 
Holiness. 

17 | have, then, exultation in Jeshu Meshiha with 
Aloha. 

18 For | dare not speak any thing which the 
Meshiha hath not done by my hands, unto the 
obedience of the Gentiles, in word and in deeds, 
19 with the power of signs and miracles, and 
with the power of the Spirit of Aloha; as that | 
have itinerated from Urishlem unto Illyrikum, to 
fulfill the preaching of Meshiha; 

being anxious to preach, not where the name 
of Meshiha had been called, that | might not 
build upon another foundation; 

*" but as it is written, They to whom it hath not 
been told of him, they shall see him; and they 
who have not heard shall be persuaded*””. 

?? On this account | have been hindered many 
times when | would have come to you. 

?3 But now, because | have no place in these 
countries, and have desired for many years to 
come to you, 

*4 when | go into Ispania, | hope to come and 
see you; and you shall lead me thitherward, 
when I shall in some measure*”’ have been 
gladdened with the sight of you. 

° But now | go to Urishlem to minister to the 
saints. 
°° For they in Makedunia and in Akaia have 
desired that a communication should be made 
from themselves with the poor and the saints 
who are at Urishlem. 

*7 They have desired (this), because they also 
are indebted to them. For if the Gentiles have 
participated with them in the Spirit, they are 
indebted to serve them in the flesh. 


378 


378 Romans 15:15 — Or, a little 


Romans 15:21 - Or, be obedient 
Romans 15:24 - Kalil men sagi, "a little from 
much" 


379 


380 


?8 This, then, when I have accomplished, and 
have sealed to them this fruit, | (intend to) pass 
by you into Ispania. 

?3 And | know that when I come to you, with the 
plenitude of the blessing of the gospel of 
Meshiha I (shall) come. 

°° Now | entreat of you, my brethren, by our 
Lord Jeshu Meshiha, and by the love of the 
Spirit, to labour with me in prayer on my behalf, 
with Aloha, 

31 that | may be delivered from them who 
believe not in Jihud, and (that) the service which 
| bear to the saints may be well received, 

32 and | may come to you with joy in the will of 
Aloha, and be rested with you. 

°° The God of peace be with all of you. Amen. 


16:1 | commend to you Phebe our sister, who is 
a deaconess of the church of Kancreos, 

that you receive her in the Lord, as is right for 
saints; and, in every thing which she requests 
from you, assist her**'; because she also hath 
assisted many, and myself also. 

Ask for the peace of Priskela and Akulos, 
labourers with me in Jeshu Meshiha; 
“ for they themselves for my life have given their 
necks; and not only do | praise them, but also all 
the churches of the Gentiles. 
° And give salutation®® to the church which is in 
their house. Ask the peace of Epenetos, my 
beloved, who was the firstfruits of Akaia in the 
Meshiha. 
ê Ask the peace of Maria, who hath laboured 
much with you. 
7 Ask for the peace of Andronikos and Junia, my 
kindred, who were captives with me, and are 
known among the apostles, and in Meshiha 
were before me. 
® Ask for the peace of Ampleos, my beloved in 
our Lord. 
* Ask for the peace of Urbanos, a labourer with 
us in Meshiha, and of Estakos my beloved. Ask 
the peace of Apella, chosen in our Lord. 

Ask for the peace of the sons of the house of 
Aristobulos. 

Ask the peace of Herodion, my relative. Ask 
for the peace of the sons of the house of 
Narkisos, who are in our Lord. 

12 Ask for the peace of Tryphena and Tryphosa, 
who labour in our Lord. Ask for the peace of 
Parsis, my beloved, who much hath laboured in 
our Lord. 


381 Romans 16:2 — Or, stand by 


382 Romans 16:5 - Shalomo 


13 Ask for the peace of Rufus, the chosen in our 
Lord, and of his mother and mine. 

14 Ask the peace of Asynkritos, and of Phlegun, 
and of Arma, and of Patroba, and of Herma, and 
of the brethren who are with them. 

15 Ask the peace of Philologos, and of Julia, and 
of Niros, and of his sister, and of Olympa, and all 
the saints who are with them. 

16 Ask for the peace one of another with the 
holy kiss. All the churches of the Meshiha ask 
for your peace. 

But | beseech of you, my brethren, beware of 
them who make divisions and scandals apart 
from the doctrine which you have learned; and 
be distant from them. 

è For they who are thus serve not our Lord 
Jeshu Meshiha, but their bellies; and with sweet 
words and benedictions seduce the hearts of the 
simple. 

19 But your obedience is known to every one; | 
rejoice therefore in you, and | wish you to be 
wise unto good (works), and pure with regard to 
[those which are] evil. 

20 But the God of peace will soon bruise Satana 
beneath your feet. The grace of our Lord Jeshu 
Meshiha be with you! 

?1 Timotheos, a labourer with me, and Lukios 
and lason and Sosipatros my kinsmen ask for 
your peace. 

22 | Tertios, who have inscribed this epistle in 
our Lord, 

?3 ask for your peace. Gaios my entertainer, and 
of all the church, asketh for your peace; (as do) 
Erastos steward of the city, and Quartos a 
brother. 

?4 To ALOHA, who is able to confirm you in my 
gospel which is proclaimed concerning Jeshu 
the Meshiha, through revelation of the mystery, 
which from the times of the ages was hidden, 

*° but is revealed in this time by means of the 
scriptures of the prophets, and by the 
commandment of the Everlasting Aloha is made 
known to all the nations for the obedience of 
faith; 

76 (to Him) who alone is wise, BE GLORY BY 
JESHU MESHIHA, UNTO THE AGE OF AGES. 
AMEN. 

*7 The grace of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha be with 
you all. Amen. 


The First Epistle to The Kurinthoyee 


1:1 Paulos the called, and the apostle of Jeshu 
Meshiha by the will of Aloha, and Sosthenis a 
brother, 

* to the church of Aloha which is in Kurinthos, 
the called, and the saints who in Jeshu Meshiha 
are sanctified; and to all them who invoke the 
name of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha in every place, 
theirs and ours; 

° Grace be with you and peace from Aloha our 
Father, and from our Lord Jeshu Meshiha. 

“| give thanks to Aloha at all times on your 
behalf for the grace of Aloha which is given to 
you through Jeshu Meshiha, 

° because in every thing you are enriched in him 
in all utterance and in all knowledge, 

ê according to the testimony of the Meshiha, 
which is confirmed in you. 

7 That you may not be deficient in one of his 
gifts, but be expecting the revelation of our Lord 
Jeshu Meshiha, 

8 who will confirm you to the end, that you may 
be without fault in the day of our Lord Jeshu 
Meshiha. 

* Faithful is Aloha, by whom you have been 
called to the fellowship of his Son Jeshu 
Meshiha our Lord. 

'° But | beseech of you, my brethren, in the 
name of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha, that you have 
all one doctrine, and that there be no divisions 
among you, but that you be perfect in one mind 
and one sentiment. 

11 For they of the house of Kloe have sent to me 
concerning you, my brethren, that there are 
contentions among you. 

12 For this | say, that there are some of you who 
say, |am of Paulos; and some who say, | am of 
Apollo; and some who say, | am of Kipha; and 
some who say, | am of the Meshiha! 

13 Is the Meshiha divided? Or was Paulos 
crucified for you? Or in the name of Paulos were 
you baptized? 

14 | thank Aloha that no man of you | have 
baptized, but only Krispos and Gaios; 

15 lest any man should say, that in my name | 
have baptized. 

1ê But I baptized also the house of Estepana; 
beyond (these) | know not that any other man | 
have baptized. 

17 Eor the Meshiha sent me not to baptize, but 
to preach; not with the wisdom of words, lest the 
cross of the Meshiha should be nullified. 


18 Eor the doctrine of the cross to those who 
perish is foolishness, but to us who are saved it 
is the power of Aloha. 

For it is written, | will destroy the wisdom of 
the wise, And I will take away the understanding 
of the prudent. 

Where is the wise? Where is the scribe? Or 
where is the disputer of this world? Hath not 
Aloha made foolish the wisdom of this world? 
?1 For inasmuch as in the wisdom of Aloha, the 
world by wisdom hath not known Aloha, it hath 
pleased Aloha, by the foolishness of preaching, 
to save them who believe. 

22 For the Jinadoyee demand signs, and the 
Aramoyee require wisdom; 

?3 but we preach the Meshiha crucified, a 
scandal to the Jihudoyee, and to the Aramoyee 
foolishness; 

** but to them who are called, Jihudoyee and 
Aramoyee, the Meshiha is the power of Aloha, 
and the wisdom of Aloha. 

*° For the foolishness of Aloha is wiser than 
men, and the weakness of Aloha is stronger 
than men. 

For you see also your calling, my brethren, 
that not many among you are wise after the 
flesh, and not many among you are powerful, 
and not many among you are of noble birth;?® 

? but Aloha hath chosen the simple of the 
world, to shame the wise, and he hath chosen 
the weak of the world, to shame the mighty, 

28 and he hath chosen those of low birth*™* in 
the world, and the outcasts, and those who are 
nothing, to bring to nothing those who are; 

*° that no flesh may boast before him. 
°° But you are of him in Jeshu Meshiha, who 
hath been made unto us wisdom, of Aloha, and 
righteousness and sanctification and 
redemption; 

S, according as it is written, He who boasteth, in 
the Lorp let him boast. 


2:1 And I, my brethren, when | came to you, not 
with grandeur of speech, nor with wisdom, did | 
evangelize to you the mystery of Aloha. 

? And | considered myself among you as not 
knowing any thing unless Jeshu Meshiha, and 
him also as crucified. 


383 1 Cor 1:26 - Or, sons of a great 


family 
384 1 Cor 1:28 - Or, mean family 


3 And | in much fear and trembling was with 
you. 

* And my speech and my preaching were not 
with the persuasion of the words of wisdom, but 
with the demonstration of the Spirit and of 
power; 

° that your faith might not be through the 
wisdom of men, but through the power of Aloha. 

ê But we speak wisdom among the perfect: not 
the wisdom of this world, nor the authorities of 
this world, which are abolished; 

7 but we speak the wisdom of Aloha in the 
mystery which was hidden, and which Aloha 
predetermined from before the worlds unto our 
glorification; 

which not one of the authorities of this world 
hath known; for if they had known it, the Lord of 
glory they would not have crucified. 

But as it is written, The eye hath not seen, Nor 
the ear heard, Nor the heart of man hath risen 
(to), That which Aloha hath prepared for those 
who love him. 
1° But unto us hath Aloha revealed, by his Spirit. 
For the Spirit all things searcheth, also the 
depths of Aloha. 

11 For what man knoweth what is in man, save 
the spirit of a man which is in him? so also that 
which is in Aloha man knoweth not, but only the 
Spirit of Aloha. 

12 But we not the spirit of this world have 
received, but the Spirit who is from Aloha, that 
we might know that the gifts from Aloha are 
given unto us; 

13 which also we speak, not with the learning of 
words of wisdom of men, but with the learning of 
the Spirit; and with spirituals the spirituals we 
compare. 

14 Eor the man who is animal receiveth not 
spirituals, for they are foolishness to him, and he 
cannot know them, because they by the Spirit 
are judged of; 

' but the spiritual judgeth of every thing, and he 
of man is not judged. 

ê For who hath known the mind of the Lorp to 
teach him? But we have the mind of the 

Meshiha. 


3:1 And I, my brethren, could not speak with you 
as with the spiritual, but as with the carnal, and 
as with babes in the Meshiha. 

? | have sustained you with milk?®, and have 
not given you meat; for as yet you could not, nor 
can you now, (bear it). 


385 1 Cor 3:2 - Or, have given you milk to drink 


3 For as yet you are in the flesh. For while there 
are among you envy and contentions and 
divisions, are you not carnal, and walking in the 
flesh? 

“ For while some of you say, | am of Paulos, 
and another, | am of Apollo, are you not carnal? 
° For who is Paulos, or who Apollo, but 
ministers by whom you have believed, and each 
as the Lorp gave to him? 

ê | have planted, and Apollo watered, but Aloha 
made to increase. 

7 He then who planteth is not any thing, nor he 
who watereth; but Aloha who maketh to 
increase. 

è But he who planteth and he who watereth are 
one, (and) each according to his labour his 
recompence receiveth. 

? For with Aloha we work; and the work of Aloha 
and the edifice of Aloha are you. 

And according to the grace of Aloha which is 
given to me, | have laid the foundation as a wise 
architect; but another hath built upon it. But let 
every man beware how he buildeth upon it. 

" For another foundation besides this which is 
laid no man can lay, (that, namely,) which is 
Jeshu the Meshiha. 

12 And if any man build upon this foundation 
gold, or silver, or precious stones; or wood, or 
hay, or stubble; 

13 the work of every one shall be revealed, for 
that day shall reveal it; for by the fire shall it be 
revealed, and the work of every man as it is the 
fire shall distinguish. 

14 And he whose work which he builded shall 
abide, will receive his recompence; 

'S and he whose work shall be burned, shall fail: 
but he (himself) shall be rescued, but so as from 
fire. 

16€ Know you not that you are the temple of 
Aloha, and (that) the Spirit of Aloha inhabiteth in 
you? 

17 Whoso destroyeth the temple of Aloha, him 
will Aloha destroy; for the temple of Aloha is 
holy, which you are. 

® Let no man deceive himself. Whoever among 
you supposeth himself wise in this world, let him 
become foolish, that he may be wise. 

19 For the wisdom of this world is folly with 
Aloha; for it is written, He hath taken the wise in 
their own craftiness. 

2 And again, The Lorp knoweth the thoughts of 
the wise, that they are vain. 

?1 On this account let no one boast in men for 
every thing is yours; 


” whether Paulos, or Apolo, or Kipha, or the 
world, or life, or death, or things standing, or 
things to be; every thing is yours, 

?3 and you are of the Meshiha, and the Meshiha 
of Aloha. 


4:1 Thus let us be accounted of you as ministers 
of the Meshiha, and stewards of the mysteries of 
Aloha. 

? So now is it required of a steward that he be 
one found faithful. 

3 But to me it is a little thing to be judged by you, 
or by any man; neither do | judge myself, 

4 for of nothing in myself am I conscious; but not 
by this am | justified, but my judge is the Lorb. 

° Therefore, do not judge before the time, until 
the LorD come, who will bring to light the hidden 
things of darkness, and reveal the thoughts of 
hearts. Then will there be praise to each man 
from Aloha. 

ê But these things, my brethren, for your sakes | 
have applied to the person of myself and of 
Apolo, that through us you may learn not to think 
of us beyond what is written; and that one above 
his neighbour may not be exalted on account of 
any thing. 

’ For who distinguisheth thee? Or, what hast 
thou which thou hast not received? And if thou 
hast received, why dost thou boast as if thou 
hadst not received? 

è Now you are satiated, and are rich, and 
without us have reigned. But | would that you did 
reign, that we might also reign with you! 

* But I consider that us, the apostles, Aloha hath 
set last, as unto death, to be a spectacle to the 
world, to angels, and to men. 

10 We are fools for the sake of the Meshiha, but 
we are wise in the Meshiha; we are the weak, 
but you are the mighty; you are glorified, and we 
abased. 

11 Until this hour we hunger and thirst, we are 
naked and beaten, and have no fixed dwelling; 

12 and we labour, working with our hands. They 
revile us, and we bless; they persecute us, and 
we endure; 

13 they maltreat us, and we pray for them; as 
the refuse of the world are we made, and the 
execration™~ of all men until now. 

14 Not as to shame you write | these things, but 
as my beloved children | admonish (you). 

1 For if you have ten thousand teachers in the 
Meshiha, yet not many fathers; for in Jeshu 
Meshiha | have begotten you through the 
gospel. 


386 4 Cor 4:13 - Kuphoro 


16 | entreat then of you that you be like me. 

17 Wherefore | have sent to you Timotheos, who 
is my beloved son, and faithful in the Lorp, that 
he may remind you of my ways in the Meshiha, 
according to that which I teach in all the 
churches. 

18 But as if | were not coming to you, some of 
you are inflated. 

19 But if the Lorp will, quickly come | unto you: 
and | will know not the words of them who exalt 
themselves, but their power. 

20 For the kingdom of Aloha is not in word, but 
in power. 
=" How are you willing? with a rod shall | come 
to you, or with love and with the spirit of 
kindliness? 


5:1 Fornication is commonly reported among 
you; and such fornication as is not heard among 
the Heathens, that the son should take the wife 
of his father. 

And you are inflated; but should you not rather 
sit in grief, that he who hath wrought this work 
might be put away from you? 

° But |, while distant from you in body, am near 
you in spirit, and now judge, as if near you, him 
who hath done this; 

4 that in the name of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha all 
of you be assembled, and | with you in spirit, 
with the power of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha, 
> and you deliver this (man) to Satana for the 
destruction of his body, that in spirit he may be 
saved in the day of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha. 
$ My brethren, your boasting is not seemly. 
Know you not that a little leaven the whole mass 
leaveneth? 

’ Purge from you the old leaven, that you may 
be anew mass; so that you may be (as) 
unleavened bread. For our Pascha is the 
Meshiha, who hath been slain for us. 

è Therefore, let us perform the festival, not with 
the old leaven, nor with the leaven of 
wickedness and animosity, but with the 
unleavened bread of purity and of holiness. 

? | have written to you by epistle, not to be 
mixed with fornicators; 

1 but Ido not say with fornicators who are in 
this world, nor speak | concerning the 
covetous”’”, or the rapacious, or the servers of 
idols; otherwise you would be obligated from the 
world also to go forth. 

" But this which | have written to you, Be not 
mixed, (is,) If any one who is called a brother be 


387 1 Cor 5:10 - Or, the oppressive 


a fornicator, or covetous*”’, or a worshipper of 
idols, or a reviler, or a drunkard, or rapacious, 
with one who is such as he not to eat bread. 

12 For what had I to judge those who are 
without? But you judge those who are within; 

13 but those who are without, Aloha judgeth: and 
put away the wicked one from among you. 


6:1 Dare any of you, having a suit with his 
brother, to litigate before the evil, and not before 
the saints? 

? Or know you not that the saints shall judge the 
world? And if the world by you is judged, are you 
not worthy to judge small matters?°° 
3 Know you not that you are to judge angels? 
How much more those (matters) which are of 
this world? 

But if you have matters to be judged regarding 
the world, those who are little-esteemed*”’ in the 
church make you to sit in judgment. 

° But to your reproach am | to say to you, So 
there is not among you even one wise man, who 
is able to adjust between a brother and his 
brother? 

ê But a brother with his brother litigates, and, 
moreover, before those who are unbelievers! 

7 Now, therefore, you make yourselves guilty 
while you have litigation one with another. For 
why do you not bear injury? and why do you not 
suffer fraud? 

ê But you injure, and you defraud, [and that] 
also your brethren! 

? Or, know you not that the unjust the kingdom 
of Aloha cannot inherit? Do not err; neither 
fornicators, nor the servers of idols, nor 
adulterers, nor corrupters, nor liers with men, 

10 nor the oppressive, nor thieves, nor 
drunkards, nor revilers, nor the rapacious, the 
kingdom of Aloha can inherit. 

11 And these were some of you; but you are 
washed, and sanctified, and justified in the name 
of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha, and by the Spirit of 
our God. 

12 All (food) is lawful to me, but all is not 
expedient for me. All is lawful to me, but over me 
no one shall have power. 

13 Food is for the belly, and the belly for food: 
but Aloha will abolish them both. But the body 
was not for fornication, but for our Lord, and our 
Lord for the body. 

14 And Aloha hath raised up our Lord, and us 
will raise by his power. 

388 1 Cor 5:11 - An oppressor 
1 Cor 6:2 - Or, judgments 
1 Cor 6:4 - Or, contemptible 


389 
390 


15 Know you not that your bodies are members 
of the Meshiha? Shall one take a member of the 
Meshiha to make it a member of a harlot? 
Never! 

16 Know you not that whosoever attacheth to a 
harlot is one body? For it is said, The two shall 
be one body. 

1” But, he who attacheth to our Lord is with him 
one spirit. 

18 Flee from fornication: for every sin which a 
man committeth is without his body; but he who 
committeth fornication against his own body 
sinneth. 

? Or, know you not that your body is the temple 
of the Spirit of Holiness, who dwelleth in you, 
(even) Him whom you have received from 
Aloha? And you are not your own, 

20 for you are bought with the price; therefore 
glorify Aloha in your body and in your spirit, 
which are of Aloha. 


7:1 But concerning those (questions) of which 
you wrote to me, It is well fora man unto a 
woman not to come nigh; 

but, because of fornication, let a man take his 
wife, and let a woman take her husband. 
3 And let a man render the love that is due unto 
his wife; so also the wife to her husband. 
“ For the wife hath not authority over her body, 
but the husband; so also the man hath not 
authority over his body, but his wife. 
° Defraud not then one the other, unless you 
both agree for a time, that you may humble 
yourselves by fasting and by prayer; and return 
again unto the same will, that Satana may not 
tempt you on account of the desire of your 
bodies. 
ê But this | speak as to the infirm; (and) not from 
commandment. 
’ For | would that all men were as | am, in 
chastity. But every man hath the gift given to him 
from Aloha; this one thus, and the other thus. 
ê But | say to those who have no wives, and to 
the widows, that it is expedient for them to 
remain as | do. 
? Yet, if they persevere not, they should marry; 
for it is better to take a wife than to burn with 
concupiscence. 

But those who have wives | command, yet 
not I, but my Lord, that the wife from her 
husband separate not. 

1! Yet, if she separate, let her remain without a 
man, or unto her husband be reconciled. And let 
not a man put away his wife. 

12 But to the rest | say, not my Lord, If a brother 
hath a wife who is not a believer, and she be 


willing to dwell with him, let him not put her 
away. 

13 And any woman who has an husband 
unbelieving, and be willeth to dwell with her, let 
her not put away her husband. 

14 Eor the man who believeth not is sanctified by 
the wife who believeth; and any wife who 
believeth not is sanctified by the husband who 
believeth; otherwise their children would be 
unclean; but now are they clean. 

15 But if he who believeth not separate, let him 
separate; a brother or a sister is not in servitude 
to these: unto peace Aloha hath called us. 

'© Eor how knowest thou, wife, whether thou 
mayest save thy husband? Or knowest thou, 
man, if thy wife thou mayest save? 

17 But (according as) the Lorp hath distributed 
to every one, as Aloha hath called, so let him 
walk; and thus in all the churches, so | direct. 

If aman circumcised hath been called, let him 
not turn to uncircumcision; and if in 
uncircumcision he hath been called, let him not 
be circumcised. 

For circumcision is not any thing, nor 
uncircumcision, but the observances of the 
commandments of Aloha. 

” | et every man in the calling in which he hath 
been called remain. 

?1 If a servant thou wast called, be not careful: 
but, if also thou canst be made free, choose [it 
rather than] that thou shouldest serve. 

?? For he who a servant is called in the Lord, is 
the freeman of Aloha; so he who as a son of 
freedom is called, is a servant of the Meshiha. 
?3 With a price are you bought; you will not be 
servants of men. 

*4 Every one in that in which be was called, my 
brethren, in it let him remain unto? Aloha. 

*° But respecting virginity, a commandment 
from Aloha | have not received; but | give 
counsel as a man who hath had grace from 
Aloha to be faithful. 

?8 And | consider that this is good [counsel], on 
account of the necessity of the time, that it is 
expedient for a man so to be. 

Art thou bound to a wife? seek not to be 
loosed. Art thou loosed from a wife? seek not a 
wife. 

?8 Vet, if thou takest a wife, thou sinnest not; 
and if a virgin shall be to a husband, she sinneth 
not. Yet affliction in the body will be to them who 
are such; but | am sparing over you. 


391 1 Cor 7:24 - Or, with 


*° And this | say, my brethren, that the time now 
becomes contracted; and they who have wives 
should be as not having them; 

3 and they who weep, as not weeping; and they 
who rejoice, as not rejoicing; and they who buy, 
as not possessing; 

31 and they who use this world should not 
exceed the just use [thereof] for the fashion of 
this world passeth away. 

32 Wherefore | would that you be without 
anxiety; for he who hath not a wife thinketh of 
the things of his Lord, that so he may please his 
Lord; 

33 and he who hath a wife is anxious for the 
world, that so he may please his wife. 

%4 But there is a distinction between the wife 
and the virgin. She who hath no man is 
thoughtful of the things of her Lord, that she may 
be holy in her body and in her spirit; and she 
who hath a husband is thoughtful of the world, 
that so she may please her husband. 

°° But this for your own profit speak l; not to 
throw a snare over you, but that you may be 
constant towards your Lord in a comely manner, 
while not thoughtful of the world. 

But if a man consider it to be dishonourable 
toward his virgin, who hath passed her time, that 
he hath not given her to the man, (and) that it is 
proper that he should give her; as he willeth let 
him act, he sinneth not: let them marry. 

37 But be who hath firmly decided in his own 
mind, and nothing constraineth him, and (who 
hath) power in his will, and thus judgeth in his 
heart, that he will keep his virgin, doeth well. 

38 And he then who giveth his virgin doeth well, 
and be who giveth not his virgin doeth better. 

°° The wife, so long as her husband liveth, is 
bound by the law; but if her husband shall die, 
she is free, that she may do what she willeth, 
only in our Lord. 

But it is good if thus she remain, according to 
my own mind. But | think also that the Spirit of 
Aloha is in me. 


8:1 Respecting the sacrifices of idols, we know 
that in all of us there is knowledge; and 
knowledge inflateth, but love buildeth up. 

* But if a man think that he knows any thing, he 
knows nothing yet as it behoves him to know: 

° but if a man love Aloha, this (one) is 
acknowledged of him. 

j Concerning the meat of the sacrifices of idols, 
then, we know that an idol is nothing in the 
world, and that there is no other God but one. 


° For tbere are also who are called gods, 
whether in heaven or in earth, as that there are 
gods many and lords many: 

but to us our One is Aloha the Father, of 
whom are all, and we in him; and one Lorp 
Jeshu Meshiha, by whom are all, and we by him. 

7 But not in every man is this knowledge; for 
there are some who in their conscience until 
now (believe) that, with respect to idols, as of 
that which hath been sacrificed we eat. And 
because of weakness their conscience is 
deified. 

ê But meat doth not bring us nigh to Aloha. For if 
we eat, we excel not; nor if we eat not, are we 
deficient. 

* But beware that this your power become not a 
stumbling-block to the infirm ones 

10 For if a man shall see thee in whom is 
knowledge reclining in the house of idols, will not 
his conscience, because he is weak, be 
confirmed to eat that which is sacrificed, 

" and he will perish through thy knowledge? he 
who is weak, and on account of whom the 
Meshiha died. 

And if so you transgress against your 
brethren, and wound their weak consciences, do 
you not transgress against the Meshiha? 

13 On this account, if meat cause my brother to 
stumble, | will never (more) eat flesh, that | may 
not cause my brother to stumble. 


9:1 Am I not a son of freedom? am | not an 
apostle? or have | not seen Jeshu Meshiha our 
Lord? or are not you my work in my Lord? 
? And if to others | be not an apostle, yet am | 
(such) to you; and the seal of my apostleship are 
you. 
? My apology to them who judge me [for not 
receiving maintenance] is this: 
Have we not authority to eat and to drink? 
5 or have we not authority a sister, a wife, to 
lead about with us, as the rest of the apostles, 
and as the brethren of our Lord, and as Kipha? 
Or have | only, and Bar Naba, not authority to 
forbear from labour? 
7 Who serveth at service at the expenses of 
himself? or who planteth the vinery, and from 
the fruits thereof eateth not? or who pastureth 
sheep, and from the milk of the flock eateth not? 
Do | as aman speak these things? Behold, 
the law also saith these things. 
* For it is written in the law of Musha, Thou shalt 
not muzzle the ox that treadeth out (the corn). 
But of oxen is Aloha careful? 
10 But, it is evident that on our account this is 
said; for on our account it is written, because 


that in hope it behoveth the ploughman to 
plough, and him who thresheth, in hope of 
provision (to thresh). 

"If we of the spirit have sown among you, is it 
a great thing if we from you of the body shall 
reap? 

12 And if others have this power over you, much 
more have we. But we are not used in this 
power; but we bear all, lest in any thing we 
should hinder the gospel of the Meshiha. 

13 Know you not that they who serve in the 
sanctuary?” from the sanctuary are sustained? 
And they who at the altar serve share with the 
altar? 

14 So also our Lord hath commanded, that they 
who his gospel preach, by his gospel shall live. 

° But | am not used in one of these; nor on this 
account have | thus written, that so it should be 
done unto me: for it were better for me that 
dying | should die, than that any man my 
glorying should make void. 

Yet also in preaching | have no cause to 
glory: for necessity lieth upon me; for woe to me 
unless | preach! 

17 For if with my will | do this, | have a reward. 
But if without my will, (yet) a stewardship is 
confided to me. 

18 What, then, is my reward? That while 
preaching without expenses | may perform the 
annunciation of the Meshiha, and not abuse the 
power that is given to me in the gospel. 

19 Eor while free of all men, to all men I subject 
myself that the many I may gain. 

20 And | become with the Jihudoyee as a 
Jihudoya, that the Jihudoyee | may gain; and 
with them who are under the law, | become as 
one under the law, that them who are under the 
law | may gain; 

21 and to those who have not the law, I become 
as one without law, while | am not unto Aloha 
without law, but in the law of the Meshiha, that 
them also who have not law | may gain. 

?? | become with the weak as weak, that the 
weak | may gain. To all men all become I, that 
every man | may save. 

?3 But this | do that | may be a participator in the 
gospel. 

Know you not, that they who run in the 
course, run all, but one taketh to him the victory? 
So run, that you may take hold. 

*° For every man who contendeth from every 
thing (besides with) holdeth his mind; and they 
who run (do it) that they may receive a crown 


322 4 Cor 9:13 - Or, the holy house 


that is corruptible, but we one that is 
incorruptible. 

°° | therefore so run, not as about a thing 
unknown; and so smite I, as not smiting the air; 
?7 but my body | subdue and make subservient, 
lest when to others | shall have preached, | my 
very self shall be rejected. 


10:1 But | would that you know, my brethren, 
that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all 
of them in the sea were baptized, 

? and all by??? Musha were baptized in the cloud 
and in the sea, 

3 and all of them ate one spiritual food,” 

and all of them drank one spiritual drink?’; for 
they drank of that spiritual Rock®” which went 
with them,---but that Rock was the Meshiha 
himself. 

° But not with many of them was Aloha pleased; 
for they fell in the desert. 

ê But these became an example for us; that we 
should not desire evils, as they desired; 

nor also be servers of idols, as some of them 
served; as it is written, The people sat down to 
eat and to drink, and rose up to play; 

nor commit fornication, as some of them 
committed, and fell, in one day, twenty and three 
thousand; 

* nor tempt the Meshiha, as also (some) of them 
tempted, and perished by serpents. 

10 Neither murmur you, as some of them 
murmured, and perished by the hand of the 
destroyer. 

11 For all these which happened to them were 
unto us an example, and were written for our 
instruction, upon whom come?” the ends of the 
world.°%° 

12 Whoever then thinketh he standeth, let him 
beware that he fall not. 

13 Temptation cometh not (upon) you but what 
cometh on mankind; but faithful is Aloha, who 
will not permit you to be tempted more than you 
are able, but will make to your temptation a 
departure, that you may be able to endure. 

Wherefore, my beloved, flee from the 
worship?” of idols. 


393 1 Cor 10:2 - By the hand of 

3% 1 Cor 10:3 - Food of the Spirit 

1 Cor 10:4a - Drink of the Spirit 

1 Cor 10:4b - That Rock of the Spirit 

1 Cor 10:11 - Matyat-reach, arrive, attain 

1 Cor 10:11 - Trostius and Gutbir read, "The end 
of the worlds, or ages" 

39 4 Cor 10:14 — Or, service 


395 
396 
397 
398 


15 As to the wise | speak; judge what I say. 

16 The cup of thanksgiving which we bless, is it 
not the participation of the blood of the 
Meshiha? And the bread that we break, is it not 
the participation of the body of the Meshiha? 

17 As, then, one is that bread, so are we one 
body: for all we that one bread receive. 

18 Consider Israel who are in the flesh: are not 
they who eat of the sacrifices participators of the 
altar? 

19 What then do | say? that an idol is any thing, 
or (that) the sacrifice of an idol is any thing? No: 
2 but that which the Heathens sacrifice, unto 
demons they sacrifice, and not unto Aloha. But | 
would not that you be participators with demons! 
?1 You cannot drink the cup of our Lord, and the 
cup of demons; and you cannot participate in the 
table of our Lord, and in the table of demons. 

2? Or, do we provoke the Lord? are we stronger 
than he? 

?3 Every thing is lawful for me, but every thing is 
not expedient; every thing is lawful, but every 
thing doth not edify. 

** | et no man seek his own (only), but every 
man also (the profit) of his neighbour. 

Whatsoever is sold in the shambles eat, 
without inquiry on account of conscience: 

*° for the earth is the Lorb’s, and its fulness. 

? But if a man of the Heathens invite you, and 
you be willing to go, whatever is set before you 
eat, without inquiry on account of conscience. 

?8 But, if one tell you, This is of a sacrifice, eat 
not, for his sake who hath told you, and on 
account of conscience; 

7° but | say, the conscience, not yours, but his 
who told you. But why is my liberty to be ruled 
by the conscience of others? 

*° but if | use (these things) by grace, why am | 
calummated concerning that for which | give 
thanks? 

31 Whether therefore you eat or drink, or 
whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of Aloha. 

32 Give no offence to Jihudoyee, or to 
Aramoyee, or to the church of Aloha. 

As also | in every thing please all men, not 
seeking what is expedient for myself, but what is 
expedient for the many, that they may be saved. 


11:1 Be imitators of me, as | am of the Meshiha. 
? But | commend you, my brethren, that in every 
thing you remember me; and that as | have 
delivered to you precepts, you hold them. 

° But | would that you know that the Meshiha is 
the head of every man; and the head of the 
woman is the man, and the head of the Meshiha 
is Aloha. 


4 Every man who prayeth or prophesieth having 
his head covered, dishonoureth his head. 

° And every woman who prayeth or prophesieth 
having her head uncovered, dishonoureth her 
head; for she is similar to one whose head is 
shaven. 

ê For if a woman be not covered, let her be 
shorn; but if it be shameful for a woman to be 
shorn or shaven, let her be covered. 

’ For a man is not obligated to cover his head, 
because he is the likeness and the glory of 
Aloha; but woman is the glory of man. 
® For the man is not from woman, but the 
woman is from man. 

? Neither was the man created for the sake of 
woman, but woman for the sake of man. 
1° Because of this the woman is a debtor“, that 
the power*”' shall be upon her head, on account 
of the angels. 

Nevertheless man is not without woman, 
neither is woman without man, in our Lord. 

12 For as a woman is from man, so is man by 
woman; but every thing is from Aloha. 

Judge among yourselves, Is it comely for a 
woman with her head revealed to pray to Aloha? 
14 Does not nature itself teach you, that when a 

man’s hair standeth*™, it is a disgrace to him? 

13 But when a woman increaseth her hair, it is a 
glory to her; because her hair for a covering was 
given to her. 

'© But if any man contendeth about these 
things, we have no such usage as this, neither 
the church of Aloha. 

17 But this | prescribe not as praising you, 
because you go not forward, but to the less“ 
you descend. 

18 Eor, first when you are assembled in the 
church, there are divisions, (as) | hear, among 
you, and in some measure | believe. 

19 For it is to be that contentions be among you, 
that they who are approved with you may be 
known. 

20 When then you are assembled, not as 
befitteth the day of the Lord you eat and drink, 
=" but each man his own supper before eateth, 
and one is hungry, and one drunken. 

?? What? have you not houses (in) which to eat 
and drink? or do you despise the church of 
Aloha, and shame those who have nothing to 


400 1 Cor 11:10 - Chaiobo 


1 Cor 11:10 - Shultono 
1 Cor 11:14 - Koyem 
1 Cor 11:17 - Labtsirutha 


401 
402 
403 


eat? What do I say to you? Do | praise you in 
this? | praise you not. 

?3 For | received from our Lord that which | have 
delivered unto you: that our Lord Jeshu in that 
night when he was betrayed took bread; 

** and he blessed and brake, and said, Take, 
eat, this (is) my body which for you is broken: so 
do to my remembrance. 

*° Likewise after they had supped he gave also 
the cup, and said, This cup is the new covenant 
in my blood; so do, whensoever you shall drink 
(it) to my remembrance. 

°° For whensoever you eat this bread, and drink 
this cup, the death of our Lord you 
commemorate until his advent 

*7 Whoever then eateth of the bread of the 
Lorb, and drinketh of his cup, and is not worthy 
of it, is guilty of the blood of the Lorp and of his 
body. 

?8 On this account a man should prove himself, 
and then eat of this bread, and drink of this cup. 
For whoever eateth and drinketh of it while 

not worthy, condemnation to himself he eateth 
and drinketh, because he hath not distinguished 
the body of the Lorb. 

°° On this account many among you are sick 
and infirm, and many who sleep. 

31 For if we judge ourselves, we shall not be 


condemned. 

°° Wherefore, my brethren, when you assemble 
to eat, wait for one another. 

34 But whoever hungereth, in his (own) house 
let him feed; that you may not assemble unto 
condemnation. Concerning the rest, when | 
come | will direct you. 


12:1 But concerning spirituals, my brethren, | 

wish you to know 

? that you were Heathens, and unto idols which 

have no voice you were led without discernment. 
| therefore make known to you, that there is no 

man who by the Spirit of Aloha speaketh, and 

saith that Jeshu is accursed*”; and no man also 

can say that Jeshu is The Lor unless by the 

Spirit of Holiness. 

“Now, there are distributions of gifts, but one is 

the Spirit; 

° and there are distributions of ministries, but 

one is the LORD; 

404 1 Cor 11:32 - Lit. "To be chastised we are 

chastised." 

40 1 Cor 12:3 - Cherem 


ê and distributions of powers, but one is Aloha, 
who worketh all in every man. 

’ But to each is given (such) a revelation of the 
Spirit as is profitable to him. 

8 To one is given by the Spirit the word of 
wisdom, but to another the word of knowledge 
by the same Spirit; 

? and to another, faith by the same Spirit; and to 
another, the gifts of healing by the same Spirit; 
1 but to another, powers; to another, prophecy; 
to another, the discernment of spirits; but to 
another, kinds of tongues; and to another, the 
interpretation of tongues. 

" But all these one Spirit effecteth, and divideth 
unto every man as he willeth. 

12 For, as the body is one, and in it are many 
members, but all the members of the body, 
though many, are one body; so also is the 
Meshiha. 

13 Eor we all by one Spirit into one body are 
baptized; whether Jinudoyee or Aramoyee; 
whether servants or sons of freedom; and all of 
us have imbibed one Spirit. 

14 For the body also is not one member, but 
many. 

1 For if the foot should say, Because | am not 
the hand, | am not of the body itself, would it 
therefore not be of the body itself? 

1€ And if the ear should say, Because | am not 
the eye, | am not of the body itself, would it 
therefore not be of the body itself? 

17 For if the whole body were the eye, where 
would be the hearing? And if the whole were 
hearing, where would be the smelling? 

18 But now hath Aloha set all the members 
severally in the body as he willed. 

19 But if all were one member, where would be 
the body? 

2 But now the members are many, but the body 
one. 

*' The eye is not able to say to the hand, Thou 
art not needful to me; nor is the hand able to say 
to the feet, You are not needful to me. 

But those members which are considered to 
be feeble, of them is the more especial need; 

and those which we consider contemptible in 
the body, to these the more we increase the 
honour; and on those which are of shame we 
bestow the greater decoration. 

*4 But those members that are honourable in us 
have no need of adornment”: but Aloha hath 
contempered the body, and given the more 
honour to the member which is inconsiderable; 


406 1 Cor 12:24 - Or, honour 


*° that there should be no divisions in the body, 
but all the members equally one of the other 
should have care: 

*6 as that when one member shall be diseased, 
all may suffer; and if one member be glorified, all 
the members may be glorified. 

*7 But you are the body of the Meshiha, and 
members in your place. 

?8 For Aloha hath placed in the church, first, 
apostles; after them, prophets; after them, 
teachers; after them, workers of miracles*” after 
them, gifts of healing, and helpers, and leaders, 
and kinds of tongues. 

? Are all apostles? Are all prophets? Are all 
teachers? Are all workers of miracles? 

3 Have all the gifts of healing? Do all speak 
with tongues, or do all interpret? 

31 But if you are emulous of great gifts, | will yet 
show you a way more admirable. 


13:1 Though in every tongue of men and of 
angels | spoke, and had not love, | should be as 
brass which soundeth, or a cymbal which giveth 
voice. 

? And though there were in me prophecy, and | 
knew all mysteries, and all knowledge, and 
though there were in me all faith, as that | could 
remove the mountain’, and love were not in 
me, | should be nothing. 

3 And if all | have | make to feed the poor, and | 
deliver my body to burn, and love be not in me, | 
profit nothing. 

* Love is patient and benign; love envieth not; 
love is not tumultuous, nor inflated; 

5 it acteth not with unseemliness nor seeketh its 
own; it is not angry, nor thoughtful of evil; 

ê it rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the 
truth. 

7 It endureth every thing, believeth every thing; 
it hopeth all, endureth all. 

è Love never falleth*”’: for prophecies shall be 
abolished, and tongues be silent, and 
knowledge be abolished: 

for it is a little of much that we know, and a 
little of much we prophesy; 

1 but when the perfection shall have come, 
then shall be abolished that which is little. 

1! When I was a child, as a child | spake, and as 
a child | thought, and as a child | reasoned; but 
when I had become a man | abolished these 
things of childhood. 


407 1 Cor 12:28 - Powers 


1 Cor 13:2 — Mountains, Walton’s edit 
1 Cor 13:8 - Lo nophel 


408 
409 


12 But now as in a mirror we see ina figure’ 
but then---the face before the face. Now I know 
a little of much; but then shall | know even as | 
am known. 

13 Eor these are the three that remain, faith and 
hope and love; but the greatest of these is love. 


14:1 Follow (then) after love, and be emulous of 
the gifts of the Spirit, but especially that you may 
prophesy. 

? For whoever speaketh in a tongue speaketh 
not to men, but to Aloha; for man heareth 
nothing that he speaketh, but in the Spirit he 
speaketh mysteries. 

But he who prophesieth speaketh to men, 
edification and encouragement and consolation. 

He who speaketh in a tongue himself edifieth, 
and he who prophesieth the church edifieth. 

° But | would that all of you could speak with 
tongues, but especially that you could prophesy. 
For greater is he who prophesieth than he who 
speaketh with tongues, unless he interpret. But if 
he interpret, he edifieth the church. 

And now, my brethren, if | come to you and 
speak with you in tongues, what do | profit you, 
unless | speak with you, or by revelation, or by 
knowledge, or by prophecy, or by doctrine? 

’ For those [things] also which have no life in 
them, and give voice, whether pipe or harp, if 
distinction be not made between a tone and its 
fellow, how can it be known what is sung, or 
what is played?*"" 

è And if the trumpet call a voice which is not 
distinguished, who will prepare for the battle? 

* So you also, if you speak the word ina 
tongue, and there be no interpretation, how will it 
be known what you say? Will you not be as if 
speaking with the air? 

10 For, behold, there are many kinds of tongues 
in the world, and not one of them hath not 
signification;*” 

1! but if | do not know the power of the voice, | 
become as a barbarian to him who speaks, and 
he also who speaks is a barbarian to me. 

' So also you, while you are emulous of the 
gifts of the Spirit for the edification of the church, 
seek that you may excel. 

13 Arid let him who speaketh with tongues pray 
that he may interpret. 

For if | am praying in a tongue, my spirit 
prayeth, but my mind is without fruit. 


^10 1 Cor 13:12 - Or, parable 


1 Cor 14:7 - Or, stricken 
1 Cor 14:10 — Voice 


411 
412 


15 What shall | do then? | will pray with my spirit, 
and | will pray with my mind; and | will sing with 
my spirit, and | will sing with my mind. 

16 Otherwise, if thou bless with the spirit, how 
shall he who filleth the place of the unlearned*"® 
say Amen to thy thanksgiving? For he knoweth 
not what thou sayest. 

17 For thou blessest well, but thy neighbour is 
not edified. 

18 | praise Aloha that more than all of you | 
speak with tongues; 

19 but in the church | would rather speak five 
words with my mind, that others also may learn, 
than ten thousand words in a tongue. 

20 My brethren, be not children in your minds, 
but in evils be you babes, and in your minds be 
perfect. 

7" In the law it is written, In a strange language 
and in another tongue Will | speak with this 
people; Yet so will they not hear me, saith the 
LORD. 

*? Hence, tongues are appointed for a sign, not 
to the believing, but to those who believe not: 
but prophecy, not for those who believe not, but 
for those who believe. 

?3 If then all the church be assembled, and all of 
you speak with tongues, and the ignorant, or 
those who believe not, enter, will they not say 
you are insane? 

24 And if all should prophesy, and there come in 
to you the ignorant, or of those who believe not, 
he is convicted?" by you all, and reproved by 
you all; 

*° and the secrets of his heart are revealed; and 
then will he fall upon his face and worship Aloha, 
and say, Truly Aloha is in you. 

*° | say then, my brethren, that when you are 
assembled, if any one of you hath a psalm, let 
him speak; and (so too) he who hath doctrine, 
and he who hath a revelation, and he who hath 
a tongue, and he who hath the interpretation: let 
all be done unto edification. 

77 And if with a tongue any one speak, two shall 
speak, or at most three, and each shall 
(separately) speak, and one interpret. 

And if there be no one who interpreteth, let 
him who speaketh with a tongue be silent in the 
church, and between himself and Aloha let him 
speak. 

? Let the prophets speak, two or three, and let 
the rest discern. 

°° And if [somewhat] to another be revealed 
while sitting, let the first be silent. 
^3 1 Cor 14:16 - Hediuto 


414 1 Cor 14:24 - Or, searched 


31 For one by one you can all prophesy, that 

each may learn, and each be edified. 

32 For the spirit of the prophets to the prophets 

is subject. 

33 Because Aloha is not of tumult, but of peace, 

as in all the churches of the saints. 

34 Let your women in the church be silent; for it 

is not permitted to them to speak, but to be 

subject, as also saith the law. 

°° But if any wish to learn, in their houses let 

them ask their husbands; for it is a shame for a 

woman to speak in the church. 

°° Was it from you that the word of Aloha went 

forth? Or did it come only to you? 

3% But if any man of you think that he is a 

prophet, or that he is spiritual’, let him 

acknowledge these which | write to you to be the 

commandments of our Lord. 

38 But if any man know not, let him not know. 
Be emulous, therefore, my brethren, to 

prophesy, and to speak with tongues forbid not; 
but let every thing be done with decency and 

in order. 


15:1 But | make known to you, my brethren, the 
gospel which | have announced to you, and you 
have received, and in which you stand, 
? and by which you are saved; of which, the 
word | have preached to you, you are mindful, 
unless you have vainly believed. 
° For | delivered to you from the first, according 
as | had received: That the Meshiha died for our 
sins, as it is written; 
* and that he was buried, and arose the third 
day, as it is written. 
° And he was seen of Kipha, and after him, of 
the twelve, 
ê and after them, he was seen of more than five 
hundred brethren together, many of whom 
survive*’® till now, and some of them have slept. 
7 And afterward he was seen of Jakub, and after 
him of all the apostles: 
ê but last of them all, as of an abortion, he was 
seen also of me. 
°? | am the least of the apostles, and am not 
worthy to be called an apostle, because | 
persecuted the church of Aloha: 

but by the grace of Aloha | am what | am; and 
his grace in me was not in vain; but more than 
all have | laboured, (yet) not |, but his grace 
which is with me. 
11 Whether I then, or they, so we have 
proclaimed, and so have you believed. 
^13 1 Cor 14:37 - Or, of the Spirit 


^16 1 Cor 15:6 - Or, are standing 


12 But if the Meshiha is proclaimed that he rose 
from the dead, how are there among you some 
who say that there is no life for the dead? 

13 And if there be no life for the dead, (then) 
neither hath the Meshiha risen. 

14 And if the Meshiha hath not risen, vain is our 
proclamation, and vain also your faith. 

15 But we are also found false witnesses of 
Aloha; for we have testified of Aloha that he hath 
raised the Meshiha, while he hath not raised 
(him). 

16 For if the dead rise not, Meshiha also hath 
not risen; 

17 and if Meshiha hath not risen, your faith is 
made void, and you are still in your sins. 

è And already have they too who have slept in 

Meshiha perished. 

19 And if in this life only we hope in the Meshiha, 
more miserable are we than all men. 

But now hath the Meshiha risen from among 
the dead, and become the first-fruits of those 
who sleep. 

?1 And as by man was death, so also by man is 
the life of the dead. 

For as in Adam all men die, so also in the 
Meshiha are all made alive: 

every one in his order: the first-fruits was the 
Meshiha; afterward they who are of the Meshiha 
at his coming. 

24 And then will be the end, when he delivereth 
the kingdom unto Aloha the Father; when he 
abolisheth every head, and all authority and all 
powers. 

*° For it is to be that he shall reign until he hath 
set all his adversaries beneath his feet, 

6 and the last enemy be abolished, (which is) 
death. 

*7 For every thing he subjecteth beneath his 
feet. But when he saith that every thing is 
subjected to him, it is evident that (it is) with the 
exception of him who hath subjected to him all. 
?8 And when all shall have been subjected to 
him, then the Son himself will be subjected to 
him who had made subject to him all, that Aloha 
may be all in all. 
2° Else what shall they do who are baptized for 
the dead, if the dead arise not? Why are they 
baptized for the dead? 
9° And why also every hour are we standing in 
peril? 

31 | asseverate, by your glorying, my brethren, 
which is mine in our Lord Jeshu Meshiha, that 
daily | die! 

32 If as among men | have been thrown to 
beasts at Ephesus, what have | profited if the 


dead do not arise? Let us eat and drink, for to- 
morrow we die.... 

33 Mistake not; for evil narrations corrupt well- 
disposed" minds. 

34 Awaken your hearts rightly, and sin not; for 
there are some who have not the knowledge of 
Aloha; to your shame | say it. 

°° Some one of you will say, How arise the 
dead, and with what body come they? 

°° Fool, the seed which thou sowest, unless it 
die, lives not: 

37 and that thing which thou sowest is not the 
body that is to be, but thou sowest naked grain, 
of wheat, or of barley, or of the rest of seeds; 

38 but Aloha giveth it a body as he willeth, and 
to each of the seeds a body of its own nature. 
3° For every body is not alike*"®: for there is one 
body of man, and another of the beast, and 
another of the fowl and another of fishes. 

There are heavenly bodies, and there are 
earthly bodies; but one is the glory of the 
heavenly, and another of the earthly. 

There is one glory of the sun, and another 
glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; 
and star excelleth star in glory. 

“? So also is the life of the dead. They are sown 
in corruption, they arise without corruption. 

“8 They are sown in baseness, they arise in 
glory. They are sown in weakness, they arise in 
power. 

“* It is sown an animal body, it ariseth a body 
spiritual. For there is a body of the animal*"’, 
and there is a body of the spirit; 

as also it is written, Adam the first man 
became a living soul, and the last Adam a life- 
giving spirit. 

“6 But the spiritual was not first, but the animal; 
and then the spiritual. 

The first man who is of the earth is dust, the 
second man the Lorp from heaven. 

ê As was he who was dust, so also are they 
who are dust: as is he who is from heaven, so 
also are the heavenly ones. 

And as we have worn the likeness of him who 
was dust, so shall we wear the likeness of him 
who is from heaven. 
°° But this I say, my brethren, that flesh and 
blood cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven; nor 
doth corruption inherit incorruption. 


“7 1 Cor 15:33 - Reyonee basimee 


1 Cor 15:39 - Or, equal 
1 Cor 15:44 - Phagro da-nephesh, body of the 
animal life 


418 
419 


51 Behold, | tell you the mystery; We shall not all 

sleep, but we all shall be changed: 

= suddenly, as in the twinkling of the eye, at the 

last trumpet, while it calleth; and the dead will 

arise without corruption, and we shall be 

changed. 

$3 For this which is corruptible shall put on 

incorruption, and likewise (this) which dieth shall 

put on immortality. 

54 But when this which is corruptible shall put on 

incorruptibleness, and this which dieth, 

immortality, then shall be done that word which 

is written, Death is swallowed up in victory! 

°° Where is thy sting, Death? and where is thy 

victory, Shiul? 

°° But the sting of death is sin, and the strength 

of sin is the law. 

°” But thanks be to Aloha, who giveth us the 

victory by the hand of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha. 
® Wherefore, my brethren, my beloved, be 

steadfast, be not moved, but be abounding in all 

time in the work of the Lorb, while you know that 

your labour is not in vain in the LORD. 


16:1 But concerning what is [to be] collected for 
the saints, as | have instructed the churches of 
Galatia, so also do you. 

? On each first day of the week let every one of 
you at his own house lay by and keep something 
of that which cometh unto his hands, lest when | 
come there be then collections”. 

3 And when I come, those whom you shall 
choose, them will | send with an epistle, that 
they may take your bounty to Urishlem. 

* But if it be a fit work that I too go (thither), they 
also shall go with me. 

° But | will come to you when I shall have 
passed (round) from Makedunia: for | pass unto 
it, unto Makedunia. 

ê And perhaps also | may remain with you, or | 
may winter with you, that you may lead me on to 
the place to which | shall go. 

’ For I will not now see you as | pass the way; 
for | hope to abide a time with you, if my Lord 
permit me. 

è For | remain at Ephesos until the Pentecost. 

’ Fora great door is opened to me, which is full 
of labours, and the opposers are many. 

1° But if Timotheos come among you, see that 
he may be with you without fear; for he doeth 
the work of the Lorp, as | [do]. 

1! Wherefore let no man despise him, but 
conduct him in peace, that he may come to me; 
for | wait for him with the brethren. 


%20 1 Cor 16:2 - Or, choosings, selections 


12 But of Apolo, my brethren, | begged much to 
come to you with the brethren; nevertheless it 
was not his will to come to you; but when there 
shall be opportunity he will come to you. 

13 Watch, and stand in the faith; be manful and 
be strong. 

14 And let all your affairs be done in love. 

15 But | entreat of you, my brethren, for the 
house of Stephano, because you know they are 
the first-fruits of Akaia, and have disposed 
themselves for the service of the saints, 

'© that you be submissive to such as they, and 
to every one who laboureth with us and helpeth. 
17 But I am glad of the coming of Stephano, and 
of Fortunatos, and of Akaiakos, because your 
deficiency with me they have fulfilled. 

18 Eor they have refreshed my spirit and yours. 
Wherefore acknowledge those who are such. 

19 All the churches of Asia ask for your peace; 
Akilos and Priskila, with the church which is in 
their house, ask for your peace greatly in our 
Lord. 

20 All the brethren ask for your peace. Ask the 
peace of one another with the holy kiss. 

Peace, by the writing of my hand, of 

PAULOS. 

*? Whosoever loveth not our Lord Jeshu 
Meshiha, let him be accursed. Our Lord cometh. 
?3 The grace of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha be with 
you. 

4 And my love be with you all in the Meshiha 
Jeshu. Amen. 


The Second Epistle to The Kurinthoyee 


1:1 Paulos, apostle of Jeshu Meshiha, by the 
will of Aloha; and Timotheos a brother: to the 
church of Aloha which is in Kurinthos, and to all 
the saints who are in all Akaia. 

Grace be with you and peace, from Aloha our 
Father, and from our Lord Jeshu Meshiha. 

? Blessed be Aloha, the Father of our Lord 
Jeshu Meshiha, the Father of mercies, and the 
God of all consolation, 

“who consoleth us in all our afflictions, that we 
may be able to console those who are in all 
afflictions by that consolation by which we are 
consoled of Aloha. 

° For as the sufferings of the Meshiha abound in 
us, 

ê so, through the Meshiha, our consolation 
aboundeth also. But if we are afflicted, it is for 
your consolation and for your salvation that we 
be afflicted: and if we are consoled, it is that you 
may be consoled, that there may be in you 
perseverance to endure those sufferings which 
we also suffer. 

7 And our hope concerning you is steadfast: for 
we know that if you participate in the sufferings, 
you also participate in the consolation. 

For | would have you to know, my brethren, of 
the affliction that befell us in Asia: for we were 
greatly pressed beyond our strength, until our 
life was nigh to be dissolved, 

and because of these we had concluded (for) 
death**'; that we should not have hope in 
ourselves, but in Aloha, who raiseth the dead: 
10 who from deaths of violence delivered us, 
and who will again, we trust, deliver us, 

11 through the help of your prayers for us; that 
his gift towards us may be a benefit effected for 
many, and many may praise him on our behalf. 

12 For our glorying is this, the testimony of our 
conscience, that in simplicity and purity, and by 
the grace of Aloha, we are conversant in the 
world; and not with the wisdom of the flesh, and 
especially with you yourselves. 

13 For we write no other (things) to you than 
those which you know and acknowledge, and 
which | am confident you will acknowledge unto 
the end: 

14 even as you have in part acknowledged that 
we are your glorying, as you also are ours in the 
day of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha. 


%21 9 Cor 1:9 - Phasakan mautho 


15 And in this confidence | have willed from the 
first to come to you, that doubly you may receive 
benefit, 

16 and that | may pass by you to Makedunia, 
and again from Makedunia | may come to you, 
and you may lead me forth unto Jihud. 

17 This then that | have purposed, have | 
purposed boastingly? or are they things of the 
flesh that | purpose, that | should have in them 
Yes, yes, or No, no? 

18 Faithful is Aloha that our word with you was 
not Yes and No. 

19 For the Son of Aloha, Jeshu Meshiha, who by 
us hath been preached unto you, by me and by 
Sylvanas and by Timotheos, was not Yes and 
No, but it was Yes in him. 

2 For all the promises of Aloha in him, in the 
Meshiha, are Yes; for which by him we give 
Amen to the glory of Aloha. 

?1 But Aloha himself confirmeth us with you in 
the Meshiha, who himself hath anointed us, 

22 and hath sealed us, and given us the earnest- 
pledge’? of his Spirit in our hearts. 

?3 But | testify to Aloha on my soul that because 
| am sparing of you, | have not come to 
Kurinthos. 

*4 Not because we are lords of your faith, but 
are helpers of your joy; for by faith you stand. 


2:1 But | have determined this in myself, that | 
will not with sorrow again come to you. 

* For if | grieve you, who shall refresh me, but 
he whom | had grieved? 

3 And | have written to you this very [epistle], 
lest when I come they grieve me, they who 
ought to refresh me. But | confide in you, that my 
joy is that of all of you. 

4 And from great affliction and anxiety of heart | 
wrote those things to you with many tears, not 
that you might grieve, but (also) that you might 
know the abundant love | have towards you. 

° But if any one hath caused grief, he hath not 
grieved me (only), but a part of you all: that the 
word may not weigh upon [the whole of] you. 

ê But sufficient for him was this chastisement 
which was from many. 

7 And now on the other hand it behoves you to 
forgive him and console him, lest he who is such 
an one be swallowed up of excessive grief 


422 2 Cor 1:22 - Rhabuno 


ê | therefore | entreat of you to confirm to him 
your love. 

? On this account also | have written, to 
ascertain by experiment whether in every thing 
you will obey me. 

10 But to whom you forgive, | also. For I, too, 
what I have forgiven, have on your account 
forgiven in the presence“ of the Meshiha: 

" lest Satana get the advantage of you; for we 
know his devices. 

12 When, in preaching the gospel of the 
Meshiha, | had come to Troas, and a door was 
opened to me by the Lorp; 

13 | had no rest in my spirit because | found not 
Titos my brother. But leaving them, | went forth 
to Makedunia. 

14 But thanks unto Aloha, who in all time maketh 
us a triumph in the Meshiha, and maketh 
manifest by us the perfume of his knowledge in 
every place. 

For we are a fragrant perfume in the Meshiha 
unto Aloha in those who are saved, and in those 
who perish. 

1ê To these as a perfume of death unto death, 
and to those as a perfume of life unto life. And 
unto these who is equal? 

For we are not as the rest who commix the 
word of Aloha; but as in truth, and as from 
Aloha, before Aloha in the Meshiha do we 
speak. 


3:1 Do we begin again anew to show who we 
are? or do we need as others to write epistles of 
commendation to you concerning ourselves, or 
that you should write to commend us? 
? But you yourselves are our epistle, written in 
our hearts, and known and read of every man. 
3 For you know that you are an epistle of the 
Meshiha, who hath been ministered by us; 
written, not with ink, but by the Spirit of Aloha 
the Living; not on tablets of stone, but on the 
fleshly tablets of the heart. 

But such confidence we have through the 
Meshiha toward Aloha. 

For we are not sufficient to think any thing as 
of ourselves; but our power is from Aloha, 
ê who hath made us fit to be ministers of the 
new covenant, not in the writing, but in the spirit. 
For the writing killeth, but the Spirit maketh alive. 
7 But if the ministry of death in the writing 
engraven on stones was with glory, as that the 
sons of Israel could not look on the face of 
Musha because of the glory of his face which is 
abolished, 


423 2 Cor 2:10 - Or, the person 


® how much more then doth not the ministry of 
the Spirit excel in glory? 

? For if the ministry of condemnation was 
glorious, how much more doth not the ministry of 
justification excel in glory? 

10 For that which was glorified had no glory, in 
comparison of this excelling glory. 

" For if that which was abolished was with 
glory, how much more shall that which endureth 
be with glory? 

12 Therefore because we have this hope, we 
speak the more boldly, 

"3 and (are) not as Musha, who threw the veil 
upon his face, that the sons of Israel might not 
look upon the End of that which was to be 
abolished. 

But they are blinded in their minds unto this 
day. For when the old covenant is read, that 
very veil standeth upon them, nor is it apparent 
(to them) that in the Meshiha it hath been 
abolished. 

15 And unto this day, when Musha is read, the 
veil is thrown upon their heart. 

16 And when any one of them is converted unto 
the LorD, the veil from him is uplifted. 

1” But the Lorp himself is the Spirit; and where 
the Spirit of the Lorp, (there) is liberty. 

18 But we all with disclosed faces behold the 
glory of the LorD as in a mirror, and into the 
resemblance of it are changed from brightness 
to brightness, as by the Lorp the Spirit. 


4:1 On this account we have not weariness in 
this ministry which we have received, according 
to the mercies that are upon us. 
* But we have rejected the secrets of 
shamefulness; and walk not with craft, nor deal 
deceitfully (with) the word of Aloha; but by the 
revelation of the truth make we ourselves 
manifest to the minds of all men before Aloha. 
° But if our gospel is hid, to those who perish is 
it hid: 
i (to) them whose minds the god of this world 
hath blinded because they believe not; lest the 
light of the gospel of the glory of Meshiha, who 
is the image of Aloha, should arise upon them. 
For we preach not ourselves, but the Meshiha, 
Jeshu our Lord; but ourselves that we are your 
servants for the sake of Jeshu. 
ê For Aloha, who said, Let light arise from 
darkness, hath arisen in our hearts; that we 
should be illuminated by the knowledge of the 
glory of Aloha in the face of Jeshu Meshiha. 
But we have this treasure in a vase of earth, 
that the greatness of the power might be from 
Aloha, and not from us. 


ê But in every thing we are afflicted, yet not 
strangled; we are beaten, yet not condemned;, 
3 persecuted, yet not forsaken; cast down, yet 
we perish not. 

10 In all time the dying of Jeshu in our bodies we 
bear, that the life also of Jeshu might in our 
bodies be revealed. 

11 For if we, the living, unto death are delivered 
on account of Jeshu, so also will the life of 
Jeshu be revealed in this our body of death. 

12 Now death in us worketh earnestly, but life in 
you. 

13 We then also who have one spirit of faith, as 
it is written, | have believed, and therefore also 
spoken; we believe, therefore also we speak. 

14 And we know that He who raised up our Lord 
Jeshu, will by Jeshu raise us also, and will 
present us with you unto himself. 

13 For every thing is for your sake, that grace, 
abounding by many, may multiply praise to the 
glory of Aloha. 

18 For this cause we have not weariness; for if 
our outward man is wasted, yet the interior man 
is renovated day by day. 

17 Eor the affliction of this time, while small and 
light, a glory without end for ever and ever 
prepareth for us. 

18 While we look not on these which are seen, 
but at those which are unseen. For the seen are 
of time, but the unseen are of eternity. 


5:1 For we know that if our earthly house of this 
body were dissolved, we have nevertheless a 
building that is by Aloha; a house which is not 
made with hands, in the heaven, eternal. 

? For concerning this also we groan, and long to 
put an our house which is from heaven, 

3 if, when that we have clothed, we may not be 
found naked. 

For now while we are in this house, we groan 
from the weight of it: yet are we not willing to 
cast it off, but to be clothed upon of it, that its 
mortality might be swallowed up in life. 

And he who prepareth us for this in Aloha, 
who hath given to us the earnest-pledge of his 
Spirit. 

ê For therefore do we know and are persuaded, 
that no long an we remain in the body we are in 
pilgrimage from our Lord. 

’ For by faith we walk, and not by sight. 

8 On this account we confide, and long to pass 


away" from the body, and to be with our Lord. 


49 Cor 5:8 - Or, migrate 


? We give diligence, that whether we are 
pilgrims or inhabitants, we may be pleasing unto 
Him. 

1° For we are all to stand before the tribunal of 
the Meshiha, that every man may be 
recompensed in his body (for) that which is done 
in it, whether of good or of evil. 

" Therefore, because we know the terror of our 
Lord, we persuade men; and to Aloha we are 
manifest; but | hope that to your minds also we 
are manifest. 

12 Eor we commend“ not ourselves again to 
you, but we give you cause to be boastful of us 
to them who in appearance boast, but not in 
heart. 

'S For if we be beside ourselves, (it is) unto 
Aloha; and if we be right*”®, (it in) unto you. 

For the love of the Meshiha constraineth us, 
because we judge this, That if one for every man 
hath died, then (was) every man dead. 

And for every man he died, that they who live 
should not live to themselves, but to him who on 
their behalf died and arose. 

16 And henceforth we no man know according to 
the flesh**’; and if we have known the Meshiha 
according to the flesh, yet from now we know 
not. 

17 Whoever therefore is in the Meshiha is a new 
creature; the old things have passed, 

18 and every thing hath become new from 
Aloha, who hath reconciled us to himself in the 
Meshiha, and given to us the ministry of 
reconciliation. 

19 For Aloha is in the Meshiha, who hath 
reconciled the world with his greatness; and he 
hath not reckoned unto them their sins, and hath 
put in us the word of reconciliation. 

20 We are ambassadors then for the Meshiha, 
and as if Aloha himself besought you by us: 
instead of the Meshiha*”®, therefore, we 
beseech, Be you reconciled unto Aloha. 

?1 For him who knew not sin, on our account 
hath he made sin, that we might be in him the 
righteousness of Aloha. 


6:1 And as helpers, we beseech of you that the 
grace of Aloha which you have received be not 
made ineffectual*”’ in you. 


5 2 Cor 5:12 - Or, praise 


2 Cor 5:13 - Tagninan 

2 Cor 5:16 - Baphgar, "In the body." twice 
2 Cor 5:20 - Chaloph Meshiha 

2 Cor 6:1 - Lo testaraq 


426 
427 
428 
429 


? For he hath said, In the time acceptable | have 
heard thee, And in the day of salvation | have 
helped thee. Behold, Now is the time 
acceptable; behold, Now is the day of salvation. 
° Nor in any thing give to any man occasion of 
stumbling, that no blemish may be upon our 
ministry; 

* but in every thing will we demonstrate 
ourselves that we are the ministers of Aloha; by 
much patience, by afflictions, by necessity, by 
imprisonments, 

° by stripes, by chains, by tumults, by labour, by 
watching, by fasting, 

ê by purity, by knowledge, by prolonging the 
mind, by benignity, by the Spirit of Holiness, by 
love without deceit, 
£ by the doctrine of truth, by the power of Aloha, 
by the arms of righteousness for the right hand 
and for the left, 

3 by glory and by shame, by praise and by 
abuse; as deceivers, and true; 

as unknown, and yet we are known; as dead, 
yet, lo, we live; as chastened, yet we die not; 

as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, 
yet many making rich; as having nothing, yet 
possessing every thing. 

Our mouth is opened to you, Kurinthoyee, 
and our heart expanded. 

12 You are not constrained*”’ in us, but you are 
constrained in your own bowels. 

13 But as unto (my) children, | say to you, 
Render to me my gains which are with you, and 
expand your love towards me. 

14 And be not sons of the yoke with them who 
believe not. For what participation hath 
righteousness with iniquity? Or what commixture 
hath the light with darkness? 

15 Or what concord**' hath the Meshiha with 
Satana? Or what portion hath the believer with 
the unbeliever? 

16 Or what union hath the temple of Aloha with 
(that) of demons? For you are the temple of 
Aloha the living; as it is written, | will dwell in 
them, and walk in them; And I will be their God, 
And they shall be to me a people. 

17 Wherefore come out from among them, And 
be separate from them, (saith the Lorp,) And the 
impure touch not; And | will receive you, 

18 And | will be to you a Father, And you shall 
be to me for sons and daughters, Saith the 
Lorb, who holdeth all. 


“8° 2 Cor 6:12 - Or, contracted, cramped: twice 


“37 9 Cor 6:15 - Or, peace 


7:1 Because then we have those promises, my 
beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from all 
impurity of the flesh and of the spirit, and 
accomplish sanctification in the fear of Aloha. 

* Bear with us, my brethren; we have wronged 
no man, we have corrupted no man, we have 
injured no man. 
3i speak not to your condemnation; for | have 
said already, that you are laid up in our hearts to 
die together and to live. 

“ Great is the freedom | have with you, and 
great in you is my glorying; | am full of 
consolation, and my joy greatly aboundeth in we 
in all my afflictions. 

° When, also, we had come into Makedunia, no 
repose had we for our body, but in every thing 
were we afflicted; without, fighting, and within, 
fear. 

ê But Aloha, who consoleth the humble, 
consoled us by the coming of Titos; 

and not only by his coming, but also by his 
refreshment wherewith be had been refreshed 
among you. For he told us of your love toward 
us, and of your lamentation and your soul on our 
behalf. And when | heard, my joy was great. 

è Far though I grieved you in an epistle, | repent 
me not, though | did repent. For | perceive how 
that epistle, though for an hour, did make you 
sorry; 

? but now I exercise joy, not because you were 
made sorry, but because your sorrow hath he 
sought you to repentance. For you were sorry 
towards Aloha; so that in nothing will you suffer 
loss from us 

1° For the sorrow that is for the sake of Aloha 
worketh soul-penitence, which turneth not and 
converteth, unto salvation; but the sorrow of the 
world worketh death. 

1 For, behold, (in) this very (case) that you 
were made contrite for the sake of Aloha; what 
carefulness it wrought in you, and vindication, 
and displeasure, and fear, and love, and zeal, 
and punishment! And [thus] by every thing have 
you shown yourselves to be [now] pure in this 
matter. 

12 But, it was for this we wrote to you; not on 
account of the injurer, nor on account of the 
injured one [only], but that you may know before 
Aloha our carefulness over you. 

3 For this cause we were consoled, and with 
our consolation more abundantly did we rejoice 
in the joy of Titos; because his spirit had been 
refreshed with you all. 

14 Because in whatever | had boasted to him 
concerning you, | have not been ashamed; but, 
as of every thing we had spoken truth with you, 


so also our boasting unto Titos hath been found 
in truth. 

15 And his affection is greatly enlarged toward 
you, when he remembers your obedience; 
because with fear and with trembling you 
received him. 

16 | rejoice that in every thing I can confide in 
you. 


8:1 But we make known to you, my brethren, the 
grace of Aloha which hath been given to the 
churches of Makedunia; 

* that in the great trial of their affliction there 
hath been an abounding of their joy; and the 
depth of their poverty hath been exceeded by 
the riches of their simplicity. 

3 For | testify, that according to their power, and 
more than their power, in the willingness of their 
soul, 

“ they besought of us, with much supplication, 
that they might participate in the beneficence of 
the ministry for the saints. 

° And not as we had supposed, but they gave 
themselves up first to the Lord, and also to us by 
the will of Aloha. 

ê For we would request of Titos, that as he had 
begun, so he would carry into accomplishment 
this beneficence among you also. 

’ But as you have excelled in every thing, in 
faith, and in doctrine, and in knowledge, and in 
all diligence, and in our love toward you, so also 
in this beneficence may you excel. 

® Not as though commanding | command you, 
but, from the diligence of your companions, the 
truth of your love would | put to the test. 

* For you know the beneficence of our Lord 
Jeshu Meshiha, that for your sake he became 
poor, though he was rich, that you through his 
poverty might be enriched. 

1 But counseling | counsel you this which 
helpeth you; because from the last year you 
began not to will only, but also to do. 

" But now accomplish in work that which you 
willed, that as there hath been an incitement to 
will, so accomplish it in work from what you 
have. 

12 For if there be the will, according to what one 
hath, so is (he) accepted, and not according to 
what he hath not. 

13 Neither must there be to others ease, and to 
you anxiety, 

14 but in equality be you at this time; that your 
abundance may be a supply to their want, that 
also [on another occasion] their abundance may 
be for [a supply] to your want, that there may be 
equality. 


15 As it is written, He who took up much had no 
superfluity, and he who took up little was not 
deficient. 

1ê But praise to Aloha who in-gave this 
solicitude for you to the heart of Titos. 

1” For our request he accepted; and because he 
had great concern, of his own will he hath come 
forth among you. 

18 But we have sent with him our brother, whose 
praise in the gospel is in all the churches; 

19 who hath, moreover, been chosen by the 
churches to go forth with us with this bounty 
which is ministered by us to the glory of Aloha 
himself, and unto [the proof of] our cordiality. 

2 For we are precautious in this, that no one 
should lay upon us any imputation?’ with regard 
to this great bounty which is to be administered 
by us. 

21 For we are careful for the things which are 
comely, not only before Aloha, but also before 
men. 

?? But we have also sent with them our brother, 
whom we have often proved in many 
[undertakings] to be diligent; but now still more 
diligent from the great confidence he hath 
concerning you. 

?3 Whether, then, (you regard) Titos, he is my 
companion and helper among you, or the other 
brethren, they are the apostles of the churches 
of the glory of Meshiha. 

*4 Wherefore the demonstration of your love, 
and of our boasting concerning you in these 
[things], make manifest in the sight of all the 
churches. 


9:1 But concerning the administration of the 
saints, | do more (than enough) if | write to you. 

* For | know the goodness of your mind, of 
which | boasted of you to the Makedunoyee, that 
Akaia was ready since last year, and your zeal 
hath stirred up many. 

° But I have sent the brethren to you, that our 
boasting which we boasted of you may not in 
this affair be vain; but as | have said, you may 
be ready: 

“lest, if the Makedunoyee should come with 
me, and find you not ready, we be shamed---that 
| may not say, you be shamed---of the boasting 
which we have boasted. 

° For this cause | have been careful to entreat of 
these brethren to go before to you, to make 
ready that blessing of which you have caused to 
be heard before; that it may be prepared, so as 


432 2 Cor 8:20 - Or, spot 


that it may be [considered as] a blessing, [and] 
not as [the reluctant contribution of] avarice. 

ê But this [remember], he who soweth with 
scantiness, with scantiness also reapeth; and he 
who soweth with blessing, with blessing also 
shall reap. 

i Every man as he hath in his mind: not as of 
vexation or as of constraint; for a cheerful giver 
the Lord loveth. 
® For it is in the power of Aloha to increase in 
you every good, that you may always have 
every thing sufficient, and that you may abound 
in every good work. 

* As it is written, He hath dispersed and given to 
the poor, And his righteousness standeth for 
ever. 

10 But may He who giveth seed to the sower 
and bread for food, himself give and multiply 
your seed, and increase the fruits of your 
righteousness, 
1T that in every thing you may be enriched in all 
simplicity, which worketh out, through us, 
thanksgiving to Aloha. 

For, on account of the performance of this 
service, we not only supply the deficiency of the 
saints, but also cause many thanksgivings to 
abound unto Aloha. 

13 For on account of the proof of this service we 
glorify Aloha, because you are subject to the 
confession of the gospel of Meshiha, and you 
have communicated in simplicity with them and 
with every man. 

14 And prayer they offer on your behalf in great 
love, on account of the greatness of the grace of 
Aloha which is upon you. 

15 But thanks to Aloha over his gift which is 
unspeakable. 


10:1 But | Paulos beseech of you by the 
peacefulness and humility of the Meshiha, (I) 
who also in presence am humble with you, but 
while far off am confident over you, 

? beseech of you that when I come | may not be 
constrained with the confidence | have to be 
bold, as | think, over those men who imagine 
that we walk in the flesh. 

For if we walk in the flesh, yet we war not 
according to the flesh. 

For the armour of our warfare is not of the 
flesh, but of the power of Aloha; and by it we 
cast down the strong-holds of rebels, 

° and demolish reasonings and every lofty thing 
that is exalted against the knowledge of Aloha, 
and captivate all thoughts unto the obedience of 
the Meshiha. 


ê And we are prepared to execute the 
punishment of those who obey not, when your 
obedience shall be fulfilled. 

7 Do we regard persons? If any man confide in 
himself that he is of the Meshiha, let this one 
know of himself, that as he is of the Meshiha, so 
also are we. 

8 For if I should boast somewhat more of the 
authority which our Lord hath given me, | should 
not blush; because for your edification he gave it 
to me, and not for your destruction. 

? But | insist nott”, that | may not be considered 
as one who would terrify you by my epistles. 

For there are men who say, his epistles are 
weighty and forcible; but his bodily presence is 
weak, and his speech contemptible. 

" But he who after this manner speaks, shall 
conclude that what we are by the word of our 
epistle when absent, so are we in the deed 
when we are present. 

For we dare not value or compare ourselves 
with those who glorify themselves; but because 
they compare themselves with themselves, they 
do not understand. 

For we do not boast beyond our measure, but 
in the measure of the boundary which Aloha 
hath apportioned to us, that we might come also 
unto you. 

14 For it is not as not reaching to you [by divine 
appointment] we extend ourselves; for unto you 
we come with the gospel of the Meshiha. 

15 Neither boast we beyond our measure in the 
labour of others; but we have hope, that with the 
increase of your faith, we shall be enlarged 
according to our measure; 

16 and be progressive also beyond you to 
evangelize. Not as within the measure of others 
in the things that are prepared will we glory. 

7 But let him who glorieth glory in the Lorp. 

8 For it is not he who glorifieth himself who is 
approved, but he who is glorified of the Lorb. 


11:1 But | could desire that you could tolerate 
me a little, that | may speak foolishly. 
Nevertheless tolerate me, 

for I am zealous towards you with the zeal of 
Aloha; for | have betrothed you to one man, a 
pure virgin, whom I would bring unto the 
Meshiha. 
° But | fear lest, as the serpent deceived ‘Hava 
by his guile, so your minds may be corrupted 
from the simplicity that is toward the Meshiha. 
“ For if he who hath come to you shall preach to 
you another Jeshu, whom we have not 


433 2 Cor 10:9 - Or, But I connive 


preached, or you receive another Spirit which 
you have not received, or another gospel which 
you have not accepted, you would have been 
well persuaded. 

° For | consider that | am nothing inferior to 
those apostles who are most excellent. 

ê For if I am rude in my speech, | yet am not in 
my knowledge; but in every thing we are 
manifest among you. 

7 Or, offending have | offended in humbling 
myself that you may be exalted, and have 
gratuitously preached to you the gospel of 
Aloha? 

è And other churches have | despoiled, 
receiving of them expenses, for your service. 

9 And being come among you, | burdened no 
man of you; for my want the brethren who came 
from Makedunia supplied: and in every thing 
have | kept myself, and will keep, that | may not 
be burdensome to you. 

10 The truth of the Meshiha is in me, that this 
boasting shall not be abolished respecting me in 
the regions of Akaia. 

" Why? because | love you not? Aloha himself 
knoweth! 

1? But | do this, and also will do it, to cut off the 
occasion of them who seek an occasion, that in 
the thing in which they boast they may be found 
as we are. 

13 For these are apostles of falsehood and 
workers of deceits, assimilating themselves to 
the apostles of the Meshiha. 

14 Nor in this may we wonder, if Satana himself 
be transformed into an angel of light. 

15 Nor is it a great thing if his ministers also are 
transformed into ministers of righteousness;--- 
whose end will be according to their works. 

1ê But I say again, Let no man think of me as a 
fool; or if otherwise, let him receive me as a fool, 
that | also may boast a little. 

17 The thing which I (now) speak, | do not speak 
in‘*** our Lord, but as in foolishness in this place 
of boasting. 

Because many boast in the flesh, | also will 
boast. 

19 For you are content to listen to the 
feebleminded, you yourselves being wise. 

For you are ruled” by one who subjugates 
you, and by one who devours you, and by one 
who takes away from you, and by one who 
exalts himself over you, and by one who smites 
you on your faces! 


84 2 Cor 11:17 = Or, according to 


433 2 Cor 11:20 - Or, judged 


?1 As in abasement | speak; as though we were 
weak through defectiveness of mind, | speak. In 
whatever any man dareth, | also dare. 

22 If they are Ebroyee, so am l; if they are 
Isroloyee, so am l; if they are the seed of 
Abraham, so am l; 

* if they are ministers of the Meshiha,---| speak 
with defectiveness of mind,---| exceed them! In 
labours | exceed them, in stripes | exceed them, 
in chains | exceed them, in deaths many times. 
24 Erom the Jihudoyee, five times, forty (stripes) 
wanting one have | devoured; 

*° three times with staves have | been beaten, 
once was | stoned, three times have | been in 
shipwreck, a day and a night without a ship have 
| been in the sea. 

76 In journeys many, in danger of rivers, in 
danger of robbers, in danger from my own race, 
in danger from the Gentiles; | have been in 
danger in cities, | have been in danger in the 
waste, in danger’ by sea, in danger from false 
brethren; 

77 in labour and weariness, in much watching, in 
hunger and thirst, in much fasting, in cold and in 
nakedness; 

?8 besides the aboundings and the gathering 
which are upon me daily, even my care which is 
for all the churches. 

*° Who is weak, and | am not weak? Who is 
offended, and | burn not? 

°° If | must boast in my infirmities, | will boast. 

31 Aloha, the Father of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha, 
the Blessed for ever and ever, knoweth that | lie 
not. 

32 In Darmsuk the great force of Aretos the king 
kept the city of the Darmsukoyee to apprehend 
me. 

33 And from a window in a basket they sent me 
from the wall, and | was delivered from his 
hands. 


12:1 | might boast, but it is not expedient; for | 
come to visions and revelations of the Lord. 

| knewf®® a man in the Meshiha fourteen years 
ago“? ---whether in the body, or out of the body, 
| know not, Aloha himself knoweth,---who, this 
one himself, was rapt unto the third [region] of 


heaven. 


436 2 Cor 12:2a - Yodano, "knowing" 


2 Cor 12:2b - Men kedom, "from before fourteen 
years" 
“88 9 Cor 12:2c - The third of heaven 


437 


3 And | know this man himself,---but whether in 
the body, or out of the body, | know not, Aloha 
himself knoweth, 

* -and he was rapt into paradise, and heard 
words which are not uttered, those which it is not 
lawful for a man to utter. 

° Of this | boast; but of myself | will not boast 
except in my infirmities. 

ê Yet if | willed to boast, | should not be a fool, 
for | say the truth; but | spare, lest any one think 
of me beyond that which he seeth me (to be), 
and what he heareth of me. 

7 And that | might not be exalted by the 
abundance of revelations, there was delivered to 
me a stimulus of my flesh, an angel of Satana to 
buffet me, that | might not be exalted. 

è Concerning this three times | entreated of my 
Lord that it might be removed from me. 

? And he said to me, My grace sufficeth thee; for 
my power in weakness is perfected. Gladly 
therefore will | boast in my infirmities, that the 
power of the Meshiha may overshadow me 

For this cause | am willing in infirmities, in 
reviling, in affliction, in persecutions, in 
distresses, for the sake of the Meshiha; for when 
| am weak, then am I strong. 

" Behold, | have been deficient in mind in my 
boasting, because you have constrained me; for 
you were debtors to bear witness concerning 
me; because in nothing am I less than those 
apostles who are the most eminent, 
nevertheless | am not any thing. 

The signs of the apostles | have wrought 
among you in all patience, and with mighty acts 
and miracles and with powers. 

13 For in what have you been less than the other 
churches, except in this, that | have not 
burdened you? Forgive me this offence. 

14 Behold, this is three times that | prepare to 
come to you, and not to burden you; for | seek 
not yours, but you. For the children ought not to 
lay up treasures for the parents, but the parents 
for their children. 

But | gladly the expenses will spend, and also 
myself will | give for the sake of your souls: 
though, while the more | love you, you the less 
love me. 

16 And, perhaps, (though) | did not burden you, 
yet (it may be said), as a crafty man with deceit | 
have robbed you. 

17 By any other whom | have sent to you have | 
made prey of you? 


18 Of Titos | requested, and sent with him the 
brethren*’. In any thing has Titos made prey of 
you? Have we not walked in one spirit, and in 
the same steps? 

19 Do you again consider that we apologize to 
you? Before Aloha in the Meshiha do we speak; 
and all, my beloved, for the sake of your up- 
building. 

2 For | fear lest, when I come to you, | should 
not find you as | wish, but should find you what 
you would not wish: lest there be contention and 
envy, and wrath and angry talk, and accusations 
and murmurings, and pompousness and 
agitation: 
=" and lest, when | come to you, my God may 
humiliate me, and | may have to lament over 
many who have sinned, and have not repented 
of the uncleanness and of the fornication and of 
the lasciviousness which they have committed. 


13:1 This is the third time that | prepare to come 
to you; and in the mouth of two or three 
witnesses shall every word be established. 

| have foretold you, and again | foretell you; as 
also twice while | was with you I told you, (so) 
now also being distant | write to those who have 
sinned, and to the rest of the others; that if | 
come again | will not spare. 

? Inasmuch as you demand the proof of the 
Meshiha who speaketh in me, (of) Him who is 
not weak among you, but is mighty among you: 
4 -for though he was crucified in weakness, yet 
he liveth with the power of Aloha:---so also we 
are weak with you, but we live with him through 
the power of Aloha which is among you. 

° Prove yourselves, whether in the faith itself 
you stand; try yourselves. Are you not assured 
that Jeshu the Meshiha is in yon, if you be not 
reprobates? 

ê But | trust you will know that we are not 
reprobate. 

’ But | implore of Aloha that there may not be 
any thing in you that is evil that our proving may 
be seen; but that you may do good, and that we 
may be as unproved. 

For we are not able to do any thing against the 
truth, but for the truth. 

For we rejoice when we are weak, and you are 
strong: but this also we pray, that you may be 
perfect. 

1° Wherefore while distant | write these (things), 
that when | am come | may not act severely, 
according to the power which my Lord hath 


439 2 Cor 12:18 - The Polyglot editions read, "a 


brother." 


given me for your edification, and not for your 
destruction. 

" Wherefore, my brethren, rejoice, and be 
perfect, and be comforted, and let agreement 
and peace be among you; and the God of love 
and of peace shall be with you. 

12 Salute one another with the holy kiss. 

13 All the saints ask for your peace. 

14 THE PEACE OF OUR LORD JESHU 
MESHIHA, AND THE LOVE OF ALOHA, AND 
THE COMMUNION OF THE SPIRIT OF 
HOLINESS, BE WITH YOU ALL. AMEN. 


The Epistle of Paulos to The Galatoyee 


1:1 Paulos, an apostle, not from men, nor by 
men, but by Jeshu the Meshiha, and Aloha his 
Father, who raised him from among the dead, 

? and all the brethren who are with me, to the 
churches which are in Galatia: 

° Grace be with you and peace, from Aloha the 
Father, and from our Lord Jeshu Meshiha, 

who gave himself for our sins to deliver us 
from this evil world, according to the will of Aloha 
our Father: 

> to whom be glory to the age of ages. Amen. 

ê | am amazed how soon you have been turned 
from the Meshiha himself, who called you by his 
grace, 

unto another gospel, which it is not; but there 
are men who disturb you, and (who) wish to 
remove you from the gospel of the Meshiha. 

ê But if we also, or an angel from heaven, 
should preach to you other than what we have 
preached to you, let him be accursed”. 

? As | have said before, and now again say to 
you, If any man preach to you other than what 
you have received, let him be accursed. 

10 For now do | persuade men, or Aloha? or do | 
seek to please men? For if until now | had 
pleased men, | should not have been the 
servant of the Meshiha. 

11 But | make known to you, my brethren, that 
the gospel which is preached by me was not 
from man: 

12 for neither from man had I received it and 
taught it, but by the revelation of Jeshu the 
Meshiha. 

13 For you have heard of my former manners in 
Judaism", that | exceedingly persecuted the 
church of Aloha, and made it desolate. 

14 And | excelled in Judaism more than many of 
the sons of my years who were of my kindred, 
and was exceedingly zealous for the doctrine of 
my fathers. 

1° But, when He willed who separated me from 
my mother’s womb, and called me by his grace, 

1 to reveal his Son in me, that | should preach 
among the nations, immediately | did not 
disclose to flesh and to blood; 

17 neither went | to Urishlem, to the apostles 
who were before me, but | went into Arabia, and 
again returned unto Darmsuk. 


440 Gal 1:8 - Cherem 


Gal 1:13 - Yehudoyutha 


18 And after three years | went unto Urishlem, 
that | might see Kipha, and | remained with him 
days fifteen. 

19 But others of the apostles | saw not, only 
Jakub, the brother of our Lord. 

20 But these which | write to you, behold, before 
Aloha, [I aver] that I lie not. 

?1 And after these | went to the regions of Syria 
and of Cilicia. 

2? Neither did the churches of Jihud which are in 
the Meshiha know me by face. 

?3 But this only they had heard, that he who had 
formerly persecuted us, behold, now preacheth 
he that faith which he beforetime had 
overthrown. 

*4 And in me they glorified Aloha. 


2:1 Again, from fourteen years | went up to 
Urishlem with Bar Naba, and took with me Titos. 
* But | went up by revelation; and | disclosed to 
them the gospel which I proclaim among the 
nations; and | showed it to those who were 
considered to be somewhat between myself and 
them, lest in vain | had run or should run. 

Titos also who was with me, who was an 
Aramoya, was not constrained to be 
circumcised. 

But on account of false brethren, who entered 
upon us that they might espy the liberty which 
we have in Jeshu Meshiha as that they might 
bring me*”? into subjection; 

5 yet not for the space“*? of an hour did we cast 
ourselves down to be subject to them; that the 
truth of the gospel might continue with you. 

ê But, they who were considered to be 
somewhat,---but what they were | care not, for 
Aloha accepteth not men’s faces,---they 
themselves added nothing unto me; 

7 but otherwise: for seeing that | was intrusted 
with the gospel of the uncircumcision, as Kipha 
was intrusted with [that of] the circumcision; 

8 __-for he who wrought effectually with Kipha for 
the apostleship of the circumcision, wrought 
effectually also with me for the apostleship of the 
Gentiles; 

---and knowing the grace which had been 
given to me, Jakub and Kipha and Juchanon, 
who were considered to be pillars, the right hand 
of fellowship gave to me and to Bar Naba, that 


442 Gal 2:4 - WALTON reads, "us" 


4483 Gal 2:5 - Or, the fullness of an hour 


we (should preach) among the Gentiles, and 
they among the circumcision: 

° only (requiring) that of the poor we should be 
mindful; and | have been solicitous to do this 
same thing. 

1 But when Kipha had come to Antiokia, | 
rebuked him to his face, because they were 
offended by him. 

? For until certain men came from Jakub, he 
had eaten with the Gentiles; but when they were 
come, he withdrew himself and separated, 
because he was afraid of those who were of the 
circumcision. 

13 And the rest of the Jinudoyee also were 
thrown with him in this, so that Bar Naba also 
was led away by their partiality. 

And when | saw that they were not walking 
rightly in the truth of the gospel, | said to Kipha 
in the presence of them all: If thou who art a 
Jihudoya live as an Aramoya and not Judaically, 
why forcest thou the Gentiles to live Judaically? 

If we who by our nature are Jihudoyee, and 
are not of the Gentile sinners, 

because we know that man is not justified by 
the works of the law, but by the faith of Jeshu 
Meshiha, also in him, in Jeshu Meshiha, have 
believed, that from the faith of the Meshiha we 
may be justified, and not from the works of the 
law; because from the works of the law shall no 
flesh be justified: 

17 __If, while we seek to be justified through the 
Meshiha, we also ourselves are found sinners, is 
Jeshu Meshiha therefore the minister of sin? It 
cannot be. 

18 Eor, if those things which | destroyed | build 
again, | make it manifest of myself that | 
transgress the commandment. 

19 For | by the law to the law am dead, that unto 
Aloha I may live: 

2 and with the Meshiha am | crucified, and from 
henceforth | live not, but in me liveth Meshiha; 
and this that | now live in the flesh | live by the 
faith of the Son of Aloha, who loved me and 
gave himself for me. 

| do not deny the grace of Aloha; for if 
righteousness is by the law, the Meshiha died in 
vain! 


3:1 O deficient-minded*“* Galatoyee, who 
bewildereth you? For, behold, as if depicted 
before your eyes, hath Jeshu the Meshiha been 
crucified. 


™ Gal 3:1 - Chasiri-reyonee 


? This only would | know from you: Through the 
works of the law received you the Spirit, or 
through the hearing of faith? 

3 Are you so foolish*”” that having begun in the 
Spirit you are now finishing in the flesh? 

* And all these have you borne in vain? But 
would it be in vain? 

° Then, he who imparted to you the Spirit, and 
wrought miracles among you, (did he so) 
through the works of the law, or through the 
hearing of faith? 

ê As Abraham believed Aloha, and it was 
reckoned to him for righteousness, 

7 know therefore that they who are of faith are 
the children of Abraham. 

è For Aloha who knew before that he would 
justify the Gentiles through faith, evangelized 
before unto Abraham; as saith the holy scripture: 
In thee all the nations shall be blessed: 

therefore believers are blessed with Abraham 
the believer. 

° For they who are of the works of the law are 
under the curse: for it is written, Cursed is every 
one who doeth not all that is written in this law. 

" But that man is not justified by the law before 
Aloha, this maketh manifest: because it is 
written, The just by faith shall live. 

? But the law is not of faith: but he who doeth 
those things that are written in it shall live by 
them. 

13 But us hath the Meshiha bought from the 
curse of the law, and hath been made a curse 
instead of us: for it is written, Accursed is every 
one who is hanged on the wood: 

“in order that upon the nations there might be 
the blessing of Abraham in Jeshu the Meshiha, 
that we might receive the promise of the Spirit 
through faith. 

15 My brethren, | speak as among men: That a 
covenant of man because confirmed no one 
rejecteth, or changeth in any thing. 

But to Abraham was promised the promise, 
and to his seed. And he did not say to him, Unto 
thy seeds, as of many; but, To thy seed, as of 
one, him, (namely,) who is the Meshiha. 

7 But | say this, that the covenant which was 
confirmed before by Aloha, in the Meshiha, the 
law which was after, four hundred and thirty 
years, cannot nullify, nor (can it) abolish the 
promise. 

18 But if the inheritance was by the law, it could 
not have been by the promise; but Aloha gave it 
unto Abraham by promise. 


“® Gal 3:3 - Saklin atun 


19 Wherefore then was the law? It was added on 
account of transgression, until the Seed should 
come, he, of whom was the promise; and the 
law was given by angels into the hand of a 
Mediator. 
*° But a Mediator is not of one; but Aloha is one. 
7" Is the law therefore against the promise of 
Aloha? Impossible: for if a law had been given 
which could make [guilty man] to live, certainly 
righteousness would have been by the law. 
* But the scripture hath included all under sin, 
that the promise through faith of Jeshu Meshiha 
might be given to them who believe. 
?3 But until (the dispensation of) faith came, the 
law kept us, as shut up unto the faith which was 
to be revealed. 
* The law therefore was our conductor“* to the 
Meshiha, that we might be justified by faith. 
*° But faith being come, we are not under the 
conductor. 

For you are all the children of Aloha through 
the faith of Jeshu the Meshiha. 
*7 For they who into the Meshiha are baptized 
have been clothed with the Meshiha. 
?8 Jihudoya or Aramoya is not; the slave or the 
free is not; male or female is not; for you are all 
one in Jeshu Meshiha. 
*° And if you are of the Meshiha, therefore are 
you the seed of Abraham, and heirs by the 
promise. 


4:1 But | say that what time the heir is a child, he 
differeth not from a servant, though he be lord of 
all, 

? but is under curators and stewards until the 
time which his father appointeth. 

3 So we also, while children, under the 
principles of the world were subjected. 

But when the fulness of the time had come, 
Aloha sent his Son, and made from a woman, 
and made under the law, 

° that them who were under the law he might 
redeem, and we might receive the constitution of 
sons. 

ê And because you are sons, Aloha hath sent 
the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, who crieth, 
Father, our Father. 

Therefore you are not servants, but sons; and 
if sons, heirs also of Aloha, through Jeshu 
Meshiha. 

è For, while not knowing Aloha, you served 
them who by their nature are not gods: 

* but now that you have known Aloha, and 
especially that you have been acknowledged of 


“ Gal 3:24 - Or, tutor 


Aloha, turn you again to those diseased and 
beggarly principles, and will to be subject to 
them afresh? 

1° Days, and months, and times, you observe. 

"| am afraid, lest vain in | have laboured 
among you. 

1? Be you as | am, for | am as you are, my 
brethren, | beseech you. In nothing have you 
injured me. 

13 For you know that in infirmity of my flesh | 
preached to you at the first. 

14 And the temptation of my flesh you did not 
despise nor execrate; but as an angel of Aloha 
you received me, and as of Jeshu Meshiha. 

° Where then is your happiness? For | testify of 
you, that had it been possible, your eye you 
would have plucked out and given to me. 

ê Have | become your adversary, because | 
have preached to you the truth? 

They are emulous of you not for good; but 
they would shut you in, that you might be 
emulous of them. 

But it is well to be emulous in good things at 
all time, and not only when | am with you. 

13 My children, with whom | travail afresh until 
the Meshiha be formed in you, 

| would be with you now, and change the 
sound of my voice, because | am astonished at 
you. 

?1 Tell me, you who are willing to be under the 
law, do you not hear the law? 

2? For it is written, that Abraham had two sons, 
one of the bondmaid, and one of the free. 

?3 But he who was of the bondmaid was born 
according to the flesh, and he who was of the 
free was by the promise. 

*4 But these are parables of the two covenants: 
the one which was from Mount Sinai bringing 
forth into bondage, which is Hagar: 

*° for Hagar is Mount Sinai which is in Arabia, 
and answers to this Urishlem, and serves in 
bondage, she and her children. 

ê But she, Urishilem the high, is the free, who is 
our mother. 

*’ For it is written, Be glad, O barren, who hast 
not borne; Exult and cry, thou who hast not 
travailed; Because multiplied are the sons of the 
desolate, More than the sons of the married 
wife. 

?8 But we, my brethren, as Ishak, are the 
children of promise. 

*° And as then he who was born of the flesh 
persecuted him who was after the Spirit, so also 
now. 
°° But what saith the scripture? Cast out the 
bondmaid and her son; for the son of the 


bondmaid shall not inherit with the son of the 
free. 

31 We therefore, my brethren, are not the 
children of the bondmaid, but the children of the 
free. 


5:1 Stand therefore in that liberty with which the 
Meshiha hath freed you, and be not enthralled 
with the yoke of bondage. 

? Behold, |, Paulos, tell you, that if you be 
circumcised, the Meshiha profiteth you nothing. 
3 But | attest again to every man who is 
circumcised, that he is obligated to fulfil the 
whole law. 

You have ceased from the Meshiha who are 
justified by the law, and from grace you have 
fallen. 

° But we through the Spirit, who is from faith, 
expect the hope of righteousness. 

For, in the Meshiha Jeshu, circumcision is not 
any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith which is 
made perfect by love. 

7 Well did you run; who hath impeded you, that 
to the truth you should not be in obedience? 

Your persuasion is not from him who called 
you. 

°? A little leaven the whole mass leaveneth. 

10 | am confident of you in our Lord, that no 
other thing you will think; and he who disturbeth 
you shall bear judgment, whoever he is. 

" But |, my brethren, if yet | have preached for 
circumcision“, why have | been persecuted? 
Hath the scandal of the cross ceased? 

12 But | would that they who disturb you were 
even cut off. 

13 But you have been called unto liberty, my 
brethren: only let not your liberty be for an 
occasion of the flesh; but in love be subjected 
one to another. 

14 Eor all the law in one word is fulfilled, in this: 
Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. 

15 But if you bite and devour one another, 
beware lest one by another you be consumed. 
ê But | say to you, Walk in the Spirit, and the 

desires of the flesh you will not work. 

17 For the flesh desireth that which is repugnant 
to the Spirit, and the Spirit desireth that which is 
repugnant to the flesh; and the two are adverse 
one to the other, that not any thing that you will 
you may do. 

18 But if by the Spirit you are led, you are not 
under the law. 


“7 Gal 5:11 - Ba-gezurtho. Khabouris-gezurtho 


19 For the works of the flesh are known, which 
are (these), fornication, uncleanness, 
lasciviousness, 
2 the worship of idols, sorcery, enmity, 
contention, ambition, wrath, calumny, divisions, 
rendings, 
si envy, murder, drunkenness, revelling, and all 
that are like these; and they who do them, as | 
told you before, so now | tell you, the kingdom of 
Aloha do not inherit. 
*? But the fruits of the Spirit are, love, joy, 
peace, prolonging of the spirit, benignity, 
goodness, fidelity, 

meekness, patience; against these the law is 
not set. 
?4 But they who are of the Meshiha have 
crucified their flesh, with all its passions and its 
lusts: 
?5 live we therefore in the Spirit, 

and let us not be vain-glorious, contemning 
one another, envying one another. 


6:1 My brethren, if a man of you be overtaken by 
a fault, you who are in the Spirit, regain him, in 
the spirit of meekness, and beware lest you also 
be tempted. 

? And bear the burden of one another, and so 
fulfil the law of the Meshiha. 

° For if a man consider that he is something, 
while he is not, he deceiveth himself. 

* But let every man prove his work, and then in 
himself he shall exult, and not in others. 
> For every man shall bear his own burden. 

ê But let him who heareth the word, 
communicate to him from whom he heareth it, in 
all good things. 

’ Do not err. Aloha is not mocked: for whatever 
a man soweth, that he reapeth. 
® He who in the flesh soweth, from the flesh 
corruption reapeth; and he who in the Spirit 
soweth, from the Spirit the life that is eternal 
shall reap. 

? And while we do that which is good, let it not 
weary us; for the time will be when we shall 
reap, and it will not weary us. 

Now, therefore, while the time is ours, let us 
do good unto every man, and especially to the 
sons of the house of the faith. 

You see these letters which | have written to 
you with my hands. 

12 They who would glory in the flesh would 
constrain you to be circumcised; only lest for the 
cross of the Meshiha they might be persecuted. 

13 For neither do these who are circumcised 
keep the law; but they will that you be 
circumcised, that in your flesh they may glory. 


14 But to me let it not be that | shall glory except 
in the cross of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha, by 
which the world is crucified unto me, and | am 
crucified to the world. 

15 For circumcision is not any thing, nor 
uncircumcision, but the new creature. 

16 And they who this pathway accomplish, 
peace be upon them and mercy, and upon the 
Israel of Aloha. 

17 Henceforth upon me let no man throw a 
burden; for the signatures of our Lord Jeshu 
Meshiha in my body | bear. 

18 The grace of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha be with 
your spirit, my brethren. Amen. 


The Epistle of Paulos to The Ephesoyee 


1:1 Paulos, an apostle of Jeshu Meshiha by the 
will of Aloha, to those who are in Ephesos, 
saints and believers in Jeshu Meshiha: 

peace be with you, and grace from Aloha our 

Father, and from our Lord Jeshu Meshiha. 

° Blessed be He, Aloha, the Father of our Lord 
Jeshu Meshiha, who hath blessed us with all 
blessings of the Spirit in heaven, in the Meshiha; 
“ as he before elected us in him, from before the 
foundations of the world, that we should be 
saints, and without blemish before him, 

° and in love predesignated us unto himself, and 
constituted us children in Jeshu Meshiha, 
according to the pleasure of his will; 

ê that the glory of his grace might be glorified, 
that (grace) which he hath poured upon us by 
the hand of his Beloved: 

7 in whom we have redemption, and by his 
blood the remission of sins, according to the 
riches of his grace 
8 which he hath made to abound in us in all 
wisdom and in all understanding of the Spirit; 

? and hath made known to us the mystery of his 
will, which before he had determined in himself 
should be done: 

10 that in the dispensation of the fullness of the 
times, every thing from the first might be 
renovated in the Meshiha, in heaven and in 
earth. 

11 And by him we have been chosen, even as 
he predesignated and willed, who worketh all 
according to the mind of his will; 

12 that we who first hoped in the Meshiha, 
should be to the honour of his glory. 

13 In whom you also heard the word of truth, 
which is the gospel of your salvation; and in 
whom you believed and were sealed with the 
Spirit of Holiness who was promised; 

who is the earnest of our inheritance, until the 
redemption of those who are saved, and unto 
the praise of his majesty. 

' On account of this, behold, | also, since | 
heard of your faith in our Lord Jeshu Meshiha, 
and your love to all the saints, 

'® have not ceased to give thanks on your 
behalf, and to remember you in my prayers; 

that the God of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha, the 

Father of glory, would give to you the Spirit of 
wisdom and of revelation in his knowledge, 

18 and would enlighten the eyes of your hearts 
to know what is the hope of his calling, and what 
the riches of the glory of his inheritance for the 
saints, 


19 and what is the inheritance of his power in us 
who believe, according to the operation of the 
might of his power, 

which he wrought in the Meshiha, and raised 
him from among the dead, and set him at his 
right hand in heaven, 

=" above all the principalities, and powers, and 
mighty ones, and rulers, and above every name 
that is named, not only in this world, but also in 
(that) to come; 

22 and subjected every thing beneath his feet: 
and Him who is over all he hath given to be the 
head of the church, 

?3 which is His body, the completeness of Him 
which all in all completeth. 


2:1 You also who were dead in your sins and in 
your transgressions, 
? in which from the first you walked according to 
the worldliness of this age“, and according to 
the will of the prince of the power of the air, of 
that Spirit who urgeth“”’ in the sons of 
disobedience; 
3 in those works in which we also walked from 
the first in the lusts of our flesh, doing the will of 
our flesh and of our mind, and were the sons of 
wrath fully as the rest. 
* But Aloha, who is rich in his mercies, for his 
great love wherewith he loved us 

while we were dead in our sins, made us alive 
with the Meshiha, and through his grace 
delivered us, 
ê and raised us with him, and made us to sit 
with him in heaven in Jeshu the Meshiha, 
7 that he might show to the ages to come the 
greatness of the riches of his grace and his 
goodness, which hath been upon us in Jeshu 
the Meshiha. 
è For by his grace are we saved through faith, 
and this was not of you, but is the gift of Aloha, 
? not of works, that no man should glory. 
1° For we are his creation, who are created in 
Jeshu Meshiha unto good works, which Aloha 
hath prepared before, that in them we should 
walk. 
1! Wherefore be mindful, that you Gentiles at 
first were carnal, and were called the 
Uncircumcision by that which is called the 


aii Eph 2:2a - Olmoyutheh dolmo hono 


T Eph 2:2b - D'methchaphto 


Circumcision, and is the work of the hands in the 
flesh; 

12 and were at that time without the Meshiha, 
and were aliens from the polity*” of Israel, and 
strangers to the covenant of the promise, and, 
without hope, were without Aloha in the world. 

13 But now, by Jeshu the Meshiha, you who 
before were far off, are brought nigh by the 
blood of the Meshiha. 

14 Eor he is our peace, he who hath made the 
two one, and hath destroyed the wall which 
stood in the midst, 

15 and the enmity, through his flesh; and the law 
of prescriptions, with its requirements, he hath 
abolished, that of the two he might create in 
himself one new man, and make peace; 

16 and hath reconciled the two in one body with 
Aloha, and by his cross hath slain the enmity. 

And coming, he preached peace to you, to 
the far off, and to the nigh; 

18 therefore, through Him there hath been made 
for us both an access by one Spirit unto the 
Father. 

' Therefore are you no more strangers and 
sojourners, but sons of the city of the saints, and 
sons of the house of Aloha; 

and you are builded upon the foundation of 
the apostles and of the prophets, and Jeshu the 

Meshiha himself is the chief corner of the 
building; 
=" and in him is the whole building increased 
and enlargeth into a holy temple in the Lorp, 

*? while you also in him are being builded the 
dwelling of Aloha by the Spirit. 


3:1 On account of this |, Paulos, am bound for 
Jeshu Meshiha for the sake of you Gentiles: 
? if you have heard the dispensation of the 
grace of Aloha which was given me for you; 
that by revelation he made known to me the 
mystery, as | have written to you in few (words); 
so that while you read you are able to 
understand my knowledge of the mystery of the 
Meshiha, 
5 which in other generations was not known to 
the sons of men, as it hath now been revealed to 
his holy apostles and to his prophets by the 
Spirit; 
ê that the Gentiles should be sons of his 
inheritance and partakers of his body, and in the 
promise which is given concerning him by the 
gospel, 


10 Eph 2:12 - Duboree, the manners, or regulations, 


of Israel 


7 of which | am made a minister, according to 
the gift of the grace of Aloha, which he hath 
given me by the operation of his power. 

To me, who am the least of all the saints, is 
given this grace that | should preach among the 
Gentiles the riches of the Meshiha, which are 
not searched; 

? and to bring to light unto all men what is the 
dispensation of the mystery which was hidden 
from the ages in Aloha, who created all: 

10 that through the church might be made 
known the wisdom of Aloha, which is full of 
diversities, to the principalities and powers who 
are in heaven, 

"' that which he prepared from of old, and which 
he hath executed by Jeshu our Lord, 

by whom we have freedom and access with 
the confidence of the faith of him. 

° Wherefore | pray that | may not weary in my 
affliction, which is on your account, for this is 
your glory; 

"4 and | bow my knees unto the Father of our 
Lord Jeshu Meshiha, 

from whom is named the whole family 
are in heaven and in earth; 

16 that he would give to you, according to the 
riches of his glory, with power to be confirmed 
by his Spirit in your interior man; 

1” that the Meshiha may dwell by faith in your 
hearts in love; your root and your foundations 
being confirmed, 

18 that you may be able to follow out with all the 
saints, what the height, and depth, and the 
length, and breadth; 

1 and know the grandeur of the love of the 
Meshiha, and be filled with all the fullness of 
Aloha. 

2 But to Him who is able with power beyond all 
to do for us above what we ask or conceive, 
according to his power which worketh in us, 

7 to Him be glory in his church, by Jeshu 
Meshiha, in all ages, for ever and ever. Amen. 


451 who 


4:1 | beseech of you, therefore, |, the bound one 
for our Lord, that you walk as is worthy of the 
calling wherewith you are called, 

? in all lowliness of mind, and composedness, 
and long-suffering; and be patient towards one 
another in love. 

? And be diligent to keep the unity of the Spirit in 
the bond of peace, 

4 that you may be in one body and in one Spirit, 
even as you are called in one hope of your 
calling. 


a Eph 3:15 - Abohutho, paternity 


° For one is the Lorb, and one the faith, and 
one the baptism; 

ê and one is Aloha, the Father of all, and over 
all, and by all, and in us all. 

’ But unto each of us is given grace according 
to the measure of the gift of the Meshiha. 

ê Wherefore it is said, He ascended on high; He 
led captive captivity, And gave gifts unto men. 

* But he who ascended, what is it but that he 
also descended first into the low places of the 
earth? 

10 He who descended, is he who also ascended 
above all the heavens, to fulfil all. 

" And he gave some who (are) apostles, and 
some who (are) prophets, and some who (are) 
evangelists, and some who (are) pastors, and 
some who (are) doctors; 

12 for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of 
the ministry, for the edification of the (church of 
the) Meshiha, 

13 until we be all one in the faith and in the 
knowledge of the Son of Aloha, and one man 
perfect in the measure of the stature of his 
completeness; 

“ and that we be no [more] children, agitated 
and altered by every wind“? of fraudulent 
doctrines of men, which in their craftiness they 
fabricate deceptively in order to seduce, 

15 but be confirmed in our love, that whatever is 
ours may increase in the Meshiha, who is the 
head, 

18 by whom the whole body is increased and 
compacted in all the limbs, according to the gift 
which is given in proportion to every member for 
the increase of the body itself, that in love its 
structure might be completed. 

17 But this | say and testify in the Lorp, that from 
henceforth you may not walk as the rest of the 
Gentiles, who walk in the vanity of their minds, 

18 and are darkened in their understandings, 
and are alienated from the life of Aloha on 
account of their ignorance, and on account of 
the blindness of their hearts; 

who are cut off from their hope, and have 
delivered themselves up to lasciviousness and 
to the working of all uncleanness in their 
greediness. 

But you have not thus learned the Meshiha, 

?1 if really you have heard him and learned as 
the truth is in Jeshu; 

”? but that you put from you your former 
habitudes, the old man who is corrupt in 
deceitful lusts, 

12 Eph 4:14 — Or, spirit 


Pa Eph 4:18 - Or, because they have not knowledge 


?3 and be renewed in the spirit of your minds, 
*4 and wear the new man, who by Aloha is 
created in righteousness and in the sanctity of 
truth“, 

*° Wherefore let lying cease from you, and 
speak the truth every man with his neighbour: 
for we are members one of another. 

ê Be angry and sin not, and let not the sun set 
upon your wrath, 

? and give no place to the accuser. 

?8 And let him who hath stolen henceforth steal 
not, but labour with his hands and do good, that 
he may have to give to him who needeth. 

*° Let no hateful word come out of your mouth, 
but that which is comely and useful for 
edification, that it may communicate grace to 
those who hear. 

3 And grieve not the Holy Spirit of Aloha, by 
whom you have been sealed unto the day of 
redemption. 

31 Let all bitterness, and heat, and anger, and 
clamour, and scandal be taken from you, with all 
malice; 

32 and be gentle one with another, and 
affectionate, and forgive one another, even as 
Aloha in the Meshiha hath forgiven us. 


5:1 Be therefore imitators of Aloha, as beloved 
children; 

? and walk in love, as the Meshiha also loved 
us, and delivered himself for us, an offering and 
a sacrifice to Aloha of a fragrant smell. 

° But fornication and all uncleanness and 
covetousness, let them not be even heard 
among you, as it becometh the saints; 

* neither filthiness, nor words of folly, or of 
jeering, or fables, which are not necessary, but, 
instead of these, thanksgiving. 

° But this know, that any man who is a 
fornicator, or impure, or covetous, or an idolater, 
hath no inheritance in the kingdom of the 
Meshiha and of Aloha; 

ê lest any man deceive you with vain words; for 
because of these cometh the anger of Aloha 
upon the sons of disobedience. 

Be not, therefore, participators with them. 

For you were before darkness, but now you 
are light in our Lord. As the sons of light, then, 
so walk. 

? For the fruits of the light are in all goodness 
and rectitude and truth. 

10 And be discerning of that which is good 
before our Lord. 


ae Eph 4:24 - Vabchasyutho daqushtho 


11 And have no communion with the works of 
darkness, which have no fruits, but reprove 
them. 

12 For that which in secrecy they do it is 
execrable even to mention. 

13 For every thing is exposed by the light, and is 
revealed, and whatever revealeth is light. 

“Wherefore it is said, Awake thou who 
sleepest, And arise from the dead, And the 
Meshiha shall enlighten thee. 

15 See then that you walk vigilantly, not as fools, 
but as the wise 

1€ Who redeem their opportunity, because the 
days are evil. 

17 On account of this, be not wanting in mind, 
but understand what is the will of Aloha. 

18 And be not drunk with wine, in which is 
intemperance, but be filled with the Spirit. 

19 And discourse with yourselves with psalms 
and with hymns and with songs of the Spirit, 
singing with your hearts unto the Lorb. 

2 And give thanks always on behalf of every 
man in the name of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha 
unto Aloha the Father. 

1 And be subject one to another in the love of 
the Meshiha. 

*? Wives, be subject to your husbands as to our 
Lord. 

?3 For the husband is the head of the wife, as 
the Meshiha is the head of the church, and he 
himself i is the Saviour of the body. 

4 But as the church is subject to Meshiha, so 
also (should) wives be unto their husbands in 
every thing. 

?5 Husbands, love your wives, as also the 
Meshiha loved his church, and gave himself for 
her, 
°° that he might sanctify her and purify her in the 
laver of waters and by the word, 

?7 and that he might constitute her a church 
unto himself, being glorified and not having 
blemish or wrinkle or any thing like these; but to 
be holy and spotless. 

So it becometh husbands to love their wives, 
as their own bodies. For he who his wife loveth, 
himself he loveth. 

*° For no man ever hated his own body, but 
nourisheth it and taketh care of it; so also the 
Meshiha (taketh care) of the church. 

For we are members of his body, and of his 
flesh are we, and of his bones. 

31! Because of this a man leaveth his father and 
his mother, and cleaveth unto his wife, and they 
two become one flesh. 

32 This mystery is great; but | speak of the 
Meshiha and of his church. 


33 Nevertheless let every one of you so love his 
wife as his own self; but let the wife reverence 
her husband. 


6:1 Children, obey your parents in our Lord, for 
this i is right; 

* and this is the first commandment which 
promiseth. Honour thy father and thy mother, 

° that it may be well with thee, and thy life be 
prolonged upon the earth. 

* Parents, make not your children angry, but 
make them to grow in the discipline and in the 
doctrine of our Lord. 

° Servants, be subject to your masters who are 
according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, 
and with simplicity of heart, as unto the Meshiha: 

ê not in the sight of the eyes, as if you were 
pleasing men (only), but as the servants of 
Meshiha who do the will of Aloha. 

And serve them from all your soul, in love, as 
unto our Lord, and not as unto men; 

knowing that whatever good a man doeth he is 
rewarded by our Lord, whether he be a servant 
or a son of freedom. 

So you, masters**, do likewise to your 
servants; forgiving them a fault*®®: for you know 
also that your Master is in heaven, and there is 
no respect of persons with him. 
1° Henceforth, my brethren, be strong in our 
Lord, and in the power of his strength. 

1 And clothe you in all the armour of Aloha, that 
you may be able to stand against the wiles of 
the accuser. 

12 For your wrestling is not with flesh and blood 
(only), but with princes, and with powers, and 
with the possessors of this dark world, and with 
the evil spirits who are under heaven. 

° Wherefore clothe you with all the armour of 
Aloha, that you may be able to meet the evil 
one, and being prepared in every thing you may 
stand. 

14 Stand, therefore, with your loins strengthened 
with the truth, and wear the breastplate of 
righteousness, 

and let your feet be shod with the preparation 
of the gospel of peace; 

and with these take to you the shield of faith, 
that therewith you may be empowered with 
strength to extinguish all the burning shafts of 
that evil one; 

17 and put on the helmet of salvation, and take 
the sword of the Spirit which is the word of 
Aloha. 


bias Eph 6:9 - Or, lords 


“°° Ebh 6:9b - “Faults,” WALTON'S Polyglot 


18 And with all prayers, and with all 
supplications, pray at all times in the Spirit, and 
in that prayer be watchful in all seasons, praying 
constantly and invoking on behalf of all the 
saints; 

19 and for me also, that the word may be given 
me with openness of my mouth, that | may 
boldly proclaim the mystery of the gospel, 

*° for which | am an ambassador in chains, that 
| may speak with freedom, as it behoveth me to 
speak it. 

1 But that you may know also what relateth to 
me, and what | am doing, behold, Tykikos, a 
brother beloved, and a faithful minister of our 
Lord, will make known to you; 

?2 whom I have sent to you on account of this, 
that he may make you acquainted with what 
relateth to me, and may comfort your hearts. 
?3 Peace be with the brethren, and love with 
faith from Aloha our Father, and from our Lord 
Jeshu Meshiha. 

Grace be with all them who love our Lord 
Jeshu Meshiha incorruptibly. Amen. 


The Epistle of Paulos to The Philipisoyee 


1:1 Paulos and Timothens, servants of Jeshu 
the Meshiha, to all the saints who are in Jeshu 
Meshiha at Philipos, with the presbyters and 
deacons. 

Grace be with you and peace from Aloha our 

Father, and from our Lord Jeshu Meshiha. 

3 | offer thanks unto Aloha upon the 
remembrance of you constantly, 

* in all my prayers on your behalf; and while 
rejoicing, | pray, 

° for your fellowship which is in the gospel from 
the first day until now; 

ê because | am confident of this, that he who 
hath begun good workings in you will himself 
make perfect until the day of our Lord Jeshu 
Meshiha. 

’ For so it is right for me to think concerning you 
all, because you are laid up in my heart; and in 
my bonds, and in the defence of the truth of the 
gospel, you are partakers with me in grace. 

For Aloha is my witness how | love you with 
the bowels of Jeshu Meshiha. 

* And this | pray, that your love may still 
increase and abound in knowledge and in all 
spiritual understanding; 

that you may distinguish those things that are 
proper, and may be pure and without offence in 
the day of the Meshiha, 

"' and filled with the fruits of righteousness 
which are in Jeshu Meshiha, to the glory and the 
honour of Aloha. 

12 But I wish you to know, my brethren, that my 
business tendeth the more to the forwarding of 
the gospel. 

13 Eor so also my bonds are manifest for the 
Meshiha in the whole palace”, and unto all 
besides. 

14 And a multitude of brethren who are in our 
Lord are strengthened on account of my bonds, 
and have dared the more fearlessly to speak the 
word of Aloha. 

15 Some preach from envy and contention, but 
some from good-will, and in the love of the 
Meshiha; 

' for they know that for the defence of the 
gospel | am appointed. 

17 But those who preach the Meshiha from 
contention do it not sincerely", but think to add 
affliction to my bonds. 


r Philip 1:13 - Or, praetorium 


TR Philip 1:17 - Or, purely 


18 Yet in this | have rejoiced, and do rejoice, that 
in every way, if for an occasion, or if in truth, the 
Meshiha shall be preached. 

19 For | know that these things shall be found 
unto my life by your prayers, and by the gift of 
the Spirit of Jeshu Meshiha; 

even as | hope and expect, that in nothing | 
shall be confounded, but manifestly, as at all 
times, so also now, the Meshiha shall be 
magnified in my body, whether by life or by 
death. 

?1 For my life is the Meshiha; and if | die, it is 
gain to me. 

But if in this life of the flesh there be also fruit 
to me from my works, | know not what to 
choose. 

?3 For these two straiten me. | desire to be set 
free, that | might be with the Meshiha, and this is 
greatly preferable’ to me; 

but also to remain in my body is the thing 
which constraineth me on your account. 

*° For | know this confidently, that | am to 
remain and tarry for your joy and for the 
increase of your faith: 

6 that when | come again to you, your glorying 
which is in Jeshu Meshiha alone shall abound in 
me. 

“7 As it becometh the gospel of the Meshiha, so 
have your conversation; that if coming | see you, 
or absent, | may hear of you, that you stand in 
one spirit and in one soul, conquering together 
for the faith of the gospel; 

?8 in nothing moved by them who stand against 
us, to the forthshowing of their perdition, and of 
our salvation. And this from Aloha 

** hath been given to you, not only believing to 
believe in the Meshiha, but also for his sake to 
suffer, 

3 and to sustain a conflict, as you have seen in 
me, and now hear concerning me. 


2:1 If, therefore, you have consolation in the 
Meshiha, and if there be comfort in love*®°, and if 
communion of the Spirit, and if compassions and 
mercies, 

4 complete my gladness by having one 
sentiment and one love, and one soul and one 
mind. 


pad Philip 1:23 - Profitable 


Philip 2:1 - “If there be the speaking of the heart 
in love.” idiom for giving consolation 


460 


? And do nothing in contention or vainglorying, 
but in meekness of mind let a man consider his 
neighbour as better than himself. 

“ And let no one care for himself (only), but 
every one for his neighbour also. 

5 And feel**' this in yourselves, which Jeshu the 
Meshiha (did) also: 

who, when he was in the form of Aloha, 
considered this not to be robbery, (this, namely,) 
that he was the co-equal of Aloha: 

7 yet emptied he himself, and took the form of a 
servant, and was made in the form of men; 

è and in fashion was found as a man, and 
humbled himself, and was obedient unto death, 
but the death of the cross. 

°? Wherefore also Aloha greatly exalted him, and 
gave him a name that is more excellent than all 
names, 

10 that at the name of Jeshu every knee should 
kneel of those in heaven, and on earth, and 
under the earth; 

and that every tongue should confess that 
Jeshu the Meshiha is the Lorp, to the glory of 
Aloha his Father. 

12 Wherefore, my beloved, as you have all time 
obeyed, not while | am near you only, but now 
that | am far from you, the more with fear and 
trembling work the work of your salvation; 

13 for Aloha himself effectuates*® in you also to 
will, also to do, the thing which you will*®. 

14 Do every thing without murmuring and 
without division; 

15 that you may be perfect and without spot, as 
the pure children of Aloha, who dwell ina 
generation depraved and perverse; 

16 and be manifest among them as luminaries in 
the world, to be unto them for a place of 
salvation, for my exultation in the day of the 
Meshiha, that | may not have run in vain, nor 
laboured to no purpose. 

17 But, also, [if | should be] offered on the 
sacrifice and service of your faith, | am glad, and 
rejoice with you all; 

18 so also you be glad and rejoice with me. 

But | hope in our Lord Jeshu to send 
Timotheos to you soon, that | also may have 
quietness when | learn concerning you. 

For | have no other who is so as my (own) 
soul, who will diligently take care for yours. 

?1 For all are seeking what is theirs, and not 
what is of Jeshu Meshiha. 


19 


i Philip 2:5 - Or, be of this sentiment in yourselves 


Philip 2:13a - Mechaphet becun 
Philip 2:13b - Medem detsobeen 


462 
463 


?? But the proof of this [evangelist] you know, 
that as a son with his father, so hath he wrought 
with me in the gospel. 

?3 Him, therefore, | hope to send to you 
speedily, when | shall have seen what [will be 
done] with me. 

*4 And | confide on my Lord, that | also speedily 
shall come unto you. 

*° But now the matter hath pressed me to send 
to you the brother Epaphroditos, who is a helper 
and labourer with me, but your messenger and 
minister to my necessity; 

°° for he desired to see you all, and was 
anxious, because he knew that you had heard 
that he was sick. 

*7 Ves, he was sick, unto death; but Aloha had 
mercy upon him; but not upon him only, but 
upon me also, lest | should have sorrow upon 
sorrow. 

<8 Urgently therefore, have | sent him to you, 
that when you have seen him again you may 
rejoice, and that | may have little breathing. 

2° Receive him, then, in the Lorp with all joy; 
and those who are such, 

3 hold in estimation: because for the work of 
the Meshiha he had come nigh unto death, and 
was disregardful of his life, that he might 
accomplish that which you had wanted in the 
service which concerned me. 


3:1 Henceforth, my brethren, rejoice in our Lord. 
To write the very same (things) to you, to me is 
not weariness, because they make you [the 
more] cautious. 

* Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, 
beware of the cutting of the flesh. 

3 For the circumcision are we, who serve Aloha 
in the spirit, and glory in Jeshu the Meshiha, and 
confide not on the flesh. 

Yet | may have confidence on the flesh. For if 
any one consider that his confidence is in the 
flesh, | [have] more than he. 

° Circumcised the son of eight days, of the 
family of Israel, of the tribe of Benyomin, Ebroia 
of Ebroyee; in the law, Pharisha; 

in zeal, a persecutor of the church; and in the 
righteousness of the law, without fault have | 
been. 

’ But these things which were my gain, | have 
reckoned loss for the Meshiha; 

è and I also (still) reckon them all loss, for the 
grandeur“ of the knowledge of Jeshu Meshiha 
my Lord; for whose sake | have lost all things, 


464 Philip 3:8 - Rabutho 


and have reckoned as dung, that the Meshiha | 
may gain, 

* and be found in him, not having my own 
righteousness, which is of the law, but that 
which is by the faith of the Meshiha, which is 
righteousness that is from Aloha: 

19 that in it | may know Jeshu, and the power of 
his resurrection, and have fellowship in his 
sufferings, and be conformed into his death, 

11 that any how*® | may be able to come to the 
resurrection which is from among the dead. 

12 | have not yet received, nor (am |) yet 
perfected; but I run, that so | may lay hold on 
that for the sake of which Jeshu the Meshiha 
hath laid hold on me 

33 My brethren, | think not concerning myself 
that | have laid hold (of the final prize); but one 
(thing) | Know, that what is behind me | forget, 
and to that which is before me | stretch, 

and run towards the sign, to obtain the victory 
of the high vocation of Aloha by Jeshu Meshiha. 

15 Let those, then, who are mature consider 
these things; and if otherwise you consider, this 
also will Aloha reveal to you. 

18 Nevertheless, that to this we may attain, in 
one way let us proceed, and with one consent. 

17 Be like me, my brethren, and consider them 
who so walk according to the pattern you have 
seen in us. 

18 For there are many who walk otherwise, of 
whom many times | have told you, but now 
weeping | tell you, they are adversaries of the 
cross of the Meshiha; 

19 they, whose end is perdition, whose god is 
their belly, and whose glory is their shame; they, 
whose mind is in the earth. 

2 But our employment*® is in heaven, and from 
thence we expect the Saviour, our Lord Jeshu 
Meshiha, 

?1 who will change the body of our abasement 
to make (it) in the fashion of his glorious body**”, 
according to his great power, by which all is 
subjected unto him. 


4:1 Wherefore, my brethren, beloved and 
tenderly-regarded, my joy and my crown, so 
stand in our Lord, my beloved. 

? Of Evhodia | beseech, and of Syntika, that one 
mind they have in our Lord. 


sie Philip 3:11 - Dalmo 


Philip 3:20 — Pulchonan; Pulchono is "occupation," 
whether sacred, cultus, or civil operation 
nee Philip 3:21 - The body of his glory 


466 


3 Also of thee | beseech, my true yokefellow, to 
be helpful to those who are labouring with me in 
the gospel, with Klimis, and with the rest of my 
helpers, whose names are written in the book of 
life. 

* Rejoice in our Lord in all time, and again | say, 
Rejoice. 

° And let your meekness be known unto every 
man: our Lord is near. 

ê For nothing be anxious; but in all time, with 
prayer and with supplication, let your requests 
be made known before Aloha: 

7 And the peace of Aloha, which is greater than 
all knowledge“, shall keep your hearts and 
your minds, through Jeshu Meshiha. 

è Finally, my brethren, those (things) which are 
true, and those which are honest, and those 
which are just, and those which are pure, and 
those which are lovely, and those which are 
laudable, and those (which are) works of praise 
and of celebration, these consider. 

These, which you have learned, and received, 
and heard, and seen in me, these perform; and 
the God of peace will be with you. 

But greatly do | rejoice in our Lord, that you 
have begun to care (again) for me, as also you 
were [formerly] careful, but you have not had 
ability*®°. 

" But | have not spoken because | have had 
need; for | have learned to make sufficient to me 
that which | have had. 

12 | know (how) to be abased, | know also bow 
to abound in all; and in every thing | am trained 
with sufficiency and with hunger, with 
abundance and with destitution [to be satisfied]: 

13 for every thing | am empowered through the 
Meshiha who strengtheneth me. 

14 Nevertheless, you have done well to 
communicate unto my afflictions. 

° Know also, you Philipisoyee, that in the 
commencement of the gospel, when | went forth 
from Makedunia, not one of the churches 
communicated to me in the account of receiving 
and giving, but you only. 

16 For also to Thessalonika one time and twice 
to my necessity you sent. 

17 Not because | seek the gift, but | seek that 
fruit may multiply unto you. 

But | have received every thing, | abound, 
and am full; and | have accepted all that you 
sent me by Epaphroditos, a sweet fragrance and 
a sacrifice, acceptable, which pleaseth Aloha. 


ps Philip 4:7 - Knowing 


“© Philip 4:10 - Sufficiency 


19 And my God shall supply all your necessity, 
according to his riches in the glory of Jeshu 
Meshiha. 

2 To Aloha our Father be praise and glory to 
the age of ages. Amen. 

7" Ask for the peace of all the saints who are in 
Jeshu the Meshiha. The brethren who are with 
me ask for your peace. 

”? All the saints ask for your peace, especially 
those who are of the house of Caesar. 

?3 The grace of our Lord Jeshu the Meshiha be 
with you all. Amen. 


The Epistle to The Kulosoyee 


1:1 Paulos, an apostle of Jeshu the Meshiha by 
the will of Aloha, and the brother Timotheos, 

? to those who are in Kulosos, the holy brethren 
and believers in Jeshu Meshiha: peace be with 
you, and grace from Aloha our Father. 

° We give thanks to Aloha the Father of our 
Lord Jeshu Meshiha in all time, and pray on your 
behalf, 

* even from our hearing of your faith in Jeshu 
Meshiha, and of your love to all the saints; 

° for the hope which is kept for you in heaven, 
which at the first you heard through the word of 
the truth of the gospel, 

ê which is preached to you, as also to all the 
world, and increaseth and giveth fruits, as also 
in you from the day that you heard, and knew 
the grace of Aloha in truth, 

7 as you learned from Epaphra our beloved 
companion, who is himself for you a faithful 
minister of the Meshiha, 

8 and who hath made known to us your love, 
which is in the Spirit. 

? On account of this also we, from the day that 
we heard, have not ceased to pray for you, and 
to supplicate that you may be filled with the 
knowledge of the will of Aloha in all wisdom and 
in all spiritual understanding, 

and may walk according to that which is just, 
and may please Aloha in all good works, and 
may yield fruit, and increase in the knowledge of 
Aloha; 

11 and in all power be empowered according to 
the greatness of his glory in all patience and 
prolongedness of spirit: 

? and with joy may give thanks to Aloha the 
Father, who hath fitted us for a portion*”° of the 
inheritance of the saints in light, 

3 and hath delivered us from the power of 
darkness, and brought us into the kingdom of his 
beloved Son, 

14 in whom we have redemption and the 
forgiveness of sins: 

5 who is the image of Aloha the unseen*”’, and 
the first-born of all the creatures. 
1€ And by him was every thing created that is in 
heaven and in earth; all that is seen, and all that 
is unseen, whether thrones or dominions, or 
princes or powers; all things by his hand and 
through him were created; 


* Col 1:12 - Or, made us adequate to a portion 


“1 Col 1:15 - Or, Aloha who is not seen 


17 and he is before all and every thing by him 
subsisteth. 

18 And he is the head of the body of the church, 
(he) who is the chief and first-born from among 
the dead, that he should be pre-eminent in all. 

For in him (the Father) hath willed all fulness 
to dwell; 

20 and by him to reconcile all things to himself, 
and to make peace through the blood of his 
cross, (even) by him, whether they be 
inhabitants in earth or in heaven. 

?1 You also, who before were aliens and 
adversaries | in your minds by your evil works, 

?? hath he reconciled now in the body of his 
flesh and through his death, to constitute you 
saints before him without spot and without 
blame; 

?3 if you continue in your faith, your foundation 
being firm, and be not moved from the hope of 
the gospel which you have heard, and which is 
proclaimed to every creature who is under 
heaven, of which |, Paulos, am made a minister. 
| rejoice in the sufferings which are on your 
account, and fulfil the void of the afflictions of the 
Meshiha in my flesh for the sake of his body, 
which is the church; 

*° of which | am made a minister according to 
the dispensation of Aloha, which was given to 
me for you, to accomplish the word of Aloha; 

*° that mystery which was hidden from ages and 
generations, but now hath been revealed unto 
his saints. 

77 To whom Aloha hath willed to make known 
what is the opulence of the glory of this mystery 
among the Gentiles; which is, The Meshiha, who 
in you (is) the hope of glory; 

whom we proclaim, and (concerning whom) 
we teach and inform every man in all wisdom, 
that we may present every man perfect in Jeshu 
Meshiha; 

*° for which also | labour and contend, 
according to the help of the power which is given 
to me. 


2:1 But I wish you to know what an agony | have 
for you and for those who are in Laodikia, and 
for the rest who have not seen my person in the 
flesh; 

* that their hearts may be comforted, and that 
they may approach in love to all the riches of 
assurance, and to the understanding of the 
knowledge of the mystery of Aloha the Father 
and of the Meshiha, 


3 in whom are hidden all the treasures of 
wisdom and of knowledge. 

* But this | say, Let no man deceive you with the 
persuasion of words. 

> For though in the flesh | am far from you, yet 
in the spirit | am with you; and I rejoice to behold 
your order, and the firmness of your faith in the 
Meshiha. 

ê As, then, you have received Jeshu Meshiha 
our Lord, (so) in him walk, 

í your roots strengthened, and you builded in 
him, and established in that faith which you have 
learned, that you may abound therein with 
thanksgiving. 

® Beware lest any man strip you by philosophy 
and by vain deceit, according to the teaching of 
men, and according to the principles of the 
world, and not according to the Meshiha, 

* in whom dwelleth all the fulness of the 
Godhead bodily. 

10 And in him also you are complete; for he is 
the head of all principalities and powers. 

Arid in him you have been circumcised with 
the circumcision which is not with hands, by the 
putting away of the flesh of sins, (even) by the 
circumcision of the Meshiha. 

12 And you have been buried with him by 
baptism, and in him have risen with him, who 
have believed in the power of Aloha who raised 
him from among the dead. 

13 And you who were dead in your sins, and in 
the uncircumcision of your flesh, he hath made 
alive with him, and forgiven us all our sins; 

* and hath blotted out in his mandates the 
writing of our debts that was against us, and 
hath taken it from the midst, and affixed it to his 
cross; 

15 and by the yielding up of his body he hath 
prostrated principalities and powers, and hath 
shamed them openly by himself. 

1ê Let no man therefore judge you in meat and 
in drink, or in the distinctions of festivals, and of 
new moons, and of shabeths*””, 

which are shadows of those to come, but the 
body | is the Meshiha. 

è And lest any man wish by abasement of mind 
to fetter you to be subject to the worship of 
angels, intruding”? upon that which he hath not 
seen, and vainly inflated in his fleshly mind; 

19 and not holding the Head, from whom all the 
body is composed and constituted in joints and 


472 Col 2:16 - Or, weeks 


Col 2:18 - Or, adventuring; perhaps better, 
presuming 


473 


limbs, and increaseth (with) the increase of 
Aloha. 

2 Eor if you are dead with the Meshiha from the 
principles of the world, why as if you lived in the 
world are you judged? 

21 As that*” you are not to touch, nor to taste, 
nor to handle? 

2? For these are of perishable use, and are 
ordinances and doctrines of men; 

?3 and appear to have in them a reason of 
wisdom, with the look of humility and the fear of 
Aloha, (as) not sparing the body, (yet) not in that 
which is (really) of value, but in those (things) 
whose use pertains to the flesh. 


3:1 If, then, you have risen with the Meshiha, 
seek (the realities) which are on high, where the 
Meshiha sitteth at the right hand of Aloha. 

? Think of that which is on high, and not of that 
on earth. 

For you are dead, and your life is hid with the 
Meshiha in Aloha; 
“ and when the Meshiha, who is our life, shall 
be manifested, then so will you be manifested 
with him in glory. 
° Put to death, then, your members that are 
upon the earth: fornication, uncleanness, and 
passions, and evil desires, and covetousness, 
which itself is idolatry. 

ê For on account of these cometh the anger of 
Aloha upon the sons of disobedience e 

7 In these also you walked aforetime, when you 
were conversant in them. 
ê But now cease you from all these; anger, 
wrath, malice, reviling, impure speech: 

? and lie not one to another, but put off the old 
man with all his manners, 

° and wear the new, who is renovated by 
knowledge i in the image of his Creator, 

1 where there is not Jihudoya and Aramoya, 
nor circumcision and uncircumcision, nor 
Javanoya and Barbaroya, nor slave and 
freeman, but the Meshiha is all and in all. 

Wear, therefore, as the chosen of Aloha, 
saints and beloved, compassions and 
tenderness, and benignity, and lowliness of 
mind, and composure, and patience. 

And bear with one another, and forgive one 
another, if any man have a complaint against his 
neighbour; even as the Meshiha hath forgiven 
you, SO also forgive; 

14 and with all these charity, which is the girdle 
of perfection. 
474 Col 2:21 - Lam. scilicet 


475 
Col 3:6 - Or, perverseness 


15 And let the peace of the Meshiha direct your 
hearts, for to it you have been called in one 
body; and give thanks to the Meshiha, 

1€ whose word shall dwell in you abundantly, in 
all wisdom. And teach and admonish yourselves 
in psalms and in hymns and in songs of the 
Spirit, and with grace sing with your hearts unto 
Aloha. 

17 And whatsoever you do, either in word or 
work, do (it) in the name of our Lord Jeshu 
Meshiha, and with thanksgiving through him 
unto Aloha the Father. 

18 Wives, be subject to your husbands, as it is 
right in the Meshiha. 

13 Men, love your wives, and be not bitter 
against them. 

° Children, obey your parents in every thing, for 
so it is pleasing before our Lord. 

?1 Fathers, exasperate not your children, that 
they be not discouraged. 

Servants, obey in every thing your masters 
according to the flesh, not in the sight of the eye 
(only), as those who please men, but from a 
simple heart, and in the fear of the Lorb. 

?3 And all that you do, from all your heart do (it), 
as to our Lord, and not as to men. 

24 And know that from our Lord you receive the 
reward in the inheritance; for the Lorp the 
Meshiha you serve. 

*° But he who injureth is recompensed as he 
had injured, and there is no acceptance of 
persons*”°. 


4:1 Masters, do equity and justice to your 
servants, Knowing that you also have a Master 
in heaven. 

? In prayer he constant, and be watchful in it, 
and (in) giving thanks; 

° praying also for us, that Aloha may open to us 
the gate of the word, to speak the mystery of the 
Meshiha, for the sake of which | am bound, 

that | may fully make it manifest, as it 
behoveth me. 

In wisdom walk towards the outward ones, 
and redeem your opportunity. 

And let your speech at all time be with grace 
as sprinkled*”’ with salt, each one knowing how 
it becometh him to return the answer. 

What concerneth me will Tykikos, a beloved 
brother and faithful minister, and our companion 
in the Lorp, make known to you: 


“6 Col 3:25 - Faces 


“7 Col 4:6 - R. MADAK, aspersit 


8 whom | have sent to you for this, that he may 
know how it is with you, and may comfort your 
hearts; 

* with Onesimos, the faithful and beloved 
brother who is of you. These will make you know 
what concerneth us. 

1° Aristarchos, a captive with me, asketh for 
your peace, and Markos, the nephew‘”® of Bar 
Naba, regarding whom you are directed, that if 
he come to you, receive him, 

" and Jeshu who is called Justos: these are of 
the circumcision, and these only have helped 
me in the kingdom of Aloha, and these have 
been a consolation to me. 

Epaphra, who is of you, asketh for your 
peace; a servant of the Meshiha, who is always 
labouring on your behalf in prayer, that you may 
stand perfect and complete in all the will of 
Aloha. 

13 For | testify of him that he hath a great zeal 
for you and for those in Laodikia and in lropolis. 

Lukos our beloved physician, and Dima, ask 
for your peace. 

15 Ask the peace of the brethren who are in 
Laodikia, and of Nymfa, and of the church which 
is in his house. 

1€ And when this epistle shall have been read to 
you, cause it also to be read in the church of the 
Laodikoyee; and that which is written from the 
Laodikoyee, read you it. 

17 And say to Arkipos, Be vigilant in the ministry 
which thou hast received in our Lord, that thou 
fulfil it. 

18 This salutation”? with the hand of me, 
PAULOS. Remember my bonds. Grace be with 
you. Amen. 


“8 Col 4:10 - Bar-dodeh, “uncle's son" 


473 Col 4:18 - Shaloma 


The First Epistle of Paulos to The Thesalonikoyee 


1:1 Paulos, and Sylvanos, and Timotheos, to the 
church of the Thesalonikoyee which (is) in Aloha 
the Father, and in our Lord Jeshu Meshiha. 
Grace be with you and peace. 

We give thanks to Aloha at all time for you all, 
and are mindful of you in our prayers constantly, 
and remember before Aloha the Father the 
works of your faith, and the labour of your love, 
and the perseverance of your hope, which is in 

our Lord Jeshu Meshiha. 

4 For we know your election, my brethren, 
beloved of Aloha, 

° because our preaching was not in words only 
with you, but with power, and with the Spirit of 
Holiness, and with the persuasion of truth. Also 
you know how we were among you, on account 
of you; 

ê and you became imitators of us and of our 
Lord, and you received the word in great 
affliction, and with the joy of the Spirit of 
Holiness, 

7 and became an example to all the believers 
who are in Makedunia and in Akaia. 

è For from you was made to be heard the word 
of our Lord, not only in Makedunia and in Akaia, 
but in every place your faith which is in Aloha 
was made to be heard, so that we have no need 
to say of you any thing. 

For they learned what an entrance we had 
unto you, and how you turned to Aloha, from the 
fear of idols, to worship Aloha the living and the 
true; 

a awaiting his Son from heaven, Jeshu himself 
whom he raised from among the dead, and who 
delivered us from the wrath that cometh. 


2:1 And you know, my brethren, that our 
entrance unto you was not in vain, 
? but having suffered before and been 
shamefully treated, as you know, in Philipos, 
and then (even) in great conflict we spoke with 
you with the confidence of our God the gospel of 
the Meshiha. 
° For our exhortation was not from deceit, nor 
from uncleanness, nor from guile; 

but as approved of Aloha to be intrusted with 
his gospel, so speaking as not to please men, 
but Aloha who trieth our hearts. 
° For never have we used flattering speech, as 
you know, nor for an occasion of covetousness, 
Aloha witnesseth. 
ê Neither have we sought glory from men, either 
from you or from others, though we could have 


been honoured ones, as the apostles of the 

Meshiha; 

but we were humble among you, and, as a 
nurse who loveth her children, so also we loved, 

and were desirous to impart to you, not only 
the gospel of Aloha, but also our life, because 
we loved you. 

? Remember, therefore, my brethren, how we 
laboured and toiled in the work of our hands by 
night and by day, that we might not be a burden 
on one of you. 

1° You witness and Aloha, how we preached to 
you the gospel of Aloha, purely and justly, and 
were without blame with all the faithful. 

"As you know how every one of you, as a 
father his children, we exhorted, and spoke with 
your hearts; 

12 and (now) we testify to you how you should 
walk worthy of Aloha himself who hath called 
you to his kingdom and to his glory. 

3 Wherefore we also give thanks constantly 
unto Aloha, that the word of Aloha which you 
received from us, was not as the word of man 
(that) you received (it), but, as it is truly, the 
word of Aloha, which in operation worketh (alike) 
in you and in all them who believe. 

But you, my brethren, have become like the 
churches of Aloha which are in Jihud, who are in 
Jeshu Meshiha, because you likewise suffer 
from your fellow-countrymen“*", as they also 
from the Jihudoyee; 

15 who killed our Lord Jeshu Meshiha, and the 
prophets who were of them, and ourselves have 
persecuted, and Aloha have not pleased, and 
have acted adversely to all men; 

16 who forbid us to speak with the Gentiles that 
they might be saved; to fill up their sins for all 
time: but upon them cometh the wrath unto the 
end! 

1” But we, my brethren, having been bereaved- 
ones of you the time of an hour, as to our 
presence’, but not in our heart, have been the 
more solicitous to see your faces with great love, 

18 and have wished to come to you, (even) |, 
Paulos, one time and two; but Satana hindered 
me. 


480 1 Thess 2:14a - Bear, sustain 


1 Thess 2:14b - Sons of your tribe 
1 Thess 2:17 - In our faces 


481 
482 


19 For what is our hope and our joy, and the 
crown of our glorying, but you, before our Lord 
Jeshu at his coming? 

° For you are our glory and our joy. 


3:1 And because we could not endure, we were 
willing to be left at Athinos alone, 

? and to send to you Timotheos our brother, a 
minister of Aloha and our helper in the gospel of 
the Meshiha, to fortify you, and inquire of you 
concerning your faith, 

3 that none of you should be slain through these 
afflictions; for you Know that to this we are set. 

For while also we were with you, we foretold 
you that we were to be afflicted, as you know 
that it hath been. 

° On account of this also, |, not enduring until | 
had sent to know your faith, lest the tempter 
should tempt you, and we should have laboured 
in vain; 

ê but now when Timotheos came to us from 
among you, and gave us intelligence of your 
faith and of your love, and that you have a good 
remembrance of us in every season, and desire 
to see us as we also (to see) you; 

on this account we were comforted in you, my 
brethren, in all our anxieties and our afflictions 
because of your faith. 

è And now we live, if you are established in our 
Lord. 

* For what thanksgiving can we render on 
account of you to Aloha, over all the joy with 
which we rejoice on your behalf, 

° unless before Aloha we supplicate 
exceedingly by night and by day to see your 
faces, and to perfect what is wanting to your 
faith? 

" But Aloha himself, the Father of our Lord 
Jeshu Meshiha, will make straight our way to 
you, 

12 and he will cause your love to increase to one 
another, and to every man, even as we love you; 

3 and will establish your hearts without blame 
in holiness, before Aloha our Father, at the 
advent of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha with all his 
saints. 


4:1 Hence then, my brethren, we pray of you, 
and beseech of you by our Lord Jeshu, that as 
you have received of us how it behoveth you to 
walk and to please Aloha, the more to increase. 
? For you know those precepts we gave to you 
in our Lord Jeshu Meshiha. 
3 For this is the will of Aloha, your sanctification; 
and that you be distant from all fornication; 


* and that every man of you know to possess 
his vessel in sanctification and in honour, 

° and not in the passions of concupiscence, as 
the rest of the Gentiles who know not Aloha. 

ê And that you dare not transgress, and defraud 
the one man his brother in this matter, because 
our Lord is the avenger of all these, as we have 
also before told you and testified. 

’ For Aloha hath not called us to uncleanness, 
but unto sanctification. 

è Therefore, whoever despiseth, not man he 
despiseth, put Aloha, who hath ingiven you his 
Holy Spirit“? 

But concerning the love of the brethren, you 
need not (that I) write to you; for you yourselves 
are taught of Aloha to love one another. 

And so do you to all the brethren who are in 
all Makedunia; but | beseech of you, my 
brethren, to excel [therein]. 

1 And study to be quiet, and be occupied with 
your own employments, and work with your 
hands, as we have admonished you; 

? that you may walk becomingly towards the 
outward- -ones, and of man you may not need. 

° But | wish you to know, my brethren, that for 
those who are asleep you should not have 
sorrow, as the rest of men, who have no hope. 

“ For if we believe that Jeshu died and arose, 
so also Aloha those who have slept in Jeshu will 
bring with him. 

15 But this we say to you by the word of our 
Lord, that we who [may be] remaining at the 
coming of our Lord, [we] who [then may] live, will 
not precede those who have slept. 

16 For our Lord himself with the mandate, and 
with the voice of the chief of angels, and with the 
trumpet of Aloha, will come down from heaven, 
and the dead who are in the Meshiha will arise 
first; 

17 and then we who remaining [may be] alive, 
shall be rapt with them together in clouds, to the 
meeting of our Lord in the expanse“; and so 
always with our Lord shall we be. 

Wherefore comfort one another with these 
words. 


5:1 But of the times and the seasons, my 
brethren, you need not that | write to you; 

for you truly know that the day of our Lord as a 
thief in the night so cometh. 
° While they shall be saying, Peace and 
tranquility, then unawares will destruction arise 


“83 1 Thess 4:8 - Da-yahab becun 


484 1 Thess 4:17 - Or, in heaven, sky 


against them, as distress upon the child-bearer, 
and they shall not escape. 

* But you, my brethren, are not in darkness, that 
that day as a thief should overtake you. 

° For all of you are sons of light, and sons of the 
day; and are not sons of the night, nor sons of 
darkness. 

ê Sleep we not, therefore, as the rest; but be 
wakeful and sober. 

’ For they who sleep, in the night sleep; and 
they who are drunken, in the night are drunken. 
® But we who are sons of the day must be 
wakeful in our minds, and wear the mail-coat 
of faith and of love, and put on the helmet of the 
hope of salvation. 

* For Aloha hath not appointed us to wrath but 
to the possession of salvation in our Lord Jeshu 
Meshiha, 

10 who died on our behalf, that, whether we 
wake or sleep, together with him we may live. 

11 Wherefore comfort one another, and edify 
one another, as also you do. 

But | entreat of you, my brethren, to know 
them who labour among you, and stand before 
your faces teaching you, 

13 that they be esteemed by you in abundant 
love; and on account of their work be at peace 
with them. 

14 And | entreat of you, my brethren, (to) 
admonish the offenders, and encourage the little 
of soul, and bear the burden of the weak, and 
prolong your spirit toward every man. 

15 And beware, lest any of you evil render for 
evil; but always follow after (those things which 
are) good (pl.) toward one another, and toward 
every man. 

1ê Be joyful always, 

17 and pray without ceasing, 

18 and in every thing give thanks; for this is the 
will of Aloha in Jeshu Meshiha concerning you. 

19 The Spirit quench not. 

2 Prophecy do not despise. 

7" Prove every thing, and what is good retain. 
22 And from every evil thing*®° flee. 

?3 But the God of peace himself will sanctify 
perfectly all of you; and your whole spirit, and 
your soul, and your body will he keep without 
fault, to the coming of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha. 

*4 Faithful is he who hath called you, who 
himself will do it! 

*° My brethren, pray for us. 

°° Ask the peace of all our brethren, with the 
holy kiss. 


485 


“8° 1 Thess 5:8 - Sheryono. Heb: Shiryon 


“8° 1 Thess 5:22 - Or, affair, business 


? | adjure you, by our Lord, that this epistle be 
read to all the holy brethren. 

?8 The grace of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha be with 
you. Amen. 


The Second Epistle of Paulos to The Thesalonikoyee 


1:1 Paulos, and Sylvanos, and Timotheos, to the 
church of the Thesalonikoyee, which is in Aloha 
our Father, and our Lord Jeshu Meshiha. 

Grace be with you, and peace, from Aloha our 
Father, and from our Lord Jeshu Meshiha. 

To give thanks we owe to Aloha at all time on 
behalf of you, my brethren, as it is proper; 
because your faith greatly increaseth, and the 
love of you all, of every man toward his 
neighbour, enlargeth; 

* as that we also boast of you in the churches of 
Aloha, of your faith and of your patience, in all 
your persecution and your affliction which you 
endure; 

° for a demonstration of the just judgment of 
Aloha, that you may be [seen to be] worthy of 
his kingdom, for the sake of which you suffer; 

ê and whether it is (not) righteous to render 
afflictions to them who afflict you. 

7 And you who are afflicted will he save‘ with 
us, at the revelation of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha 
from heaven, with the host*® of his angels, 

8 when he executeth the punishment, with 
burning of fire, on them who have not known 
Aloha, and on them who have not acknowledged 
the gospel of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha. 

For these in the judgment will be punished 
(with) the perdition of eternity, from the presence 
of our Lord, and from the glory of his power; 

when he cometh to be glorified in his saints, 
and to show his wonders in his faithful ones, that 
our testimony that was concerning you may be 
believed i in that day. 

1 On account of this at all time pray we for you, 
that Aloha may make you meet for your calling, 
and complete in you all the will of good (things), 
and the operations of faith with power; 

? that the name of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha 
may be glorified in you, and you also in him, 
according to the grace of Aloha and our Lord 
Jeshu Meshiha. 


2:1 But we beseech of you, my brethren, as it 
regards the coming of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha, 
and our assemblage with him, 

? that you be not soon moved i in your minds, nor 
perturbed, nor by word, nor by spirit, nor by 
letter, which (may be) as (if it were) from us, 
that, Behold, the day of our Lord cometh! 


487 2 Thess 1:7 - Or, make alive 


“88 2 Thess 1:7 - Or, force; chailo, "powerful array" 


° Let no one deceive you by any one of the 
methods*®’, because unless there shall come 
first the rebellion*”°, and there be revealed the 
man of sin, the son of perdition; 

“ He who is the adversary, and is exalted over 
all who is called God and Venerable; so that 
also in the temple of Aloha as Aloha he will sit, 
and will make manifest of himself as that he is 
Aloha. 

° Do you not remember, that, when | was with 
you, these | told you? 

ê And now you know what [with]holdeth, that he 
may be revealed in his time. 

’ For the mystery of iniquity already beginneth 
to be effective; only if that which now holdeth be 
taken from the midst, 

ê then will be revealed that evil one, whom our 
Lord Jeshu will consume by the spirit of his 
mouth, and will abolish by the revelation of his 
advent. 

? For the coming of that (wicked one) is the 
working of Satana, with all power, and (with) 
signs and false miracles, 

and with all unrighteous deception which is 
done in them who perish, because they have not 
received the love of the truth by which they 
might have been saved. 

"Wherefore Aloha will send them the working 
of deception, that they will believe the lie, 

12 and all of them will be judged who have not 
believed in the truth, but have had pleasure in 
unrighteousness. 

° But we are bound to give thanks unto Aloha 
at all time for you, our brethren, beloved in our 
Lord, because Aloha hath chosen you from the 
beginning unto salvation, by sanctification of the 
Spirit, and by the belief of the truth. 

* For unto these Aloha called you by our 
preaching, that you should be the glory of our 
Lord Jeshu Meshiha. 

15 Wherefore, my brethren, stand fast, and 
persevere in the precepts’ which you have 
been taught, whether by word, or by our epistle. 

16 But our Lord Jeshu Meshiha himself, and 
Aloha our Father, who hath loved us, and given 
us everlasting consolation*”, and a good hope 
through grace, 


“89 2 Thess 2:3a - Or, schemes 


2 Thess 2:3b - Mardutho 
2 Thess 2:15 - Bepukdonee 
2 Thess 2:16 - Or, the consolation of eternity 


490 
491 
492 


17 will comfort your hearts, and establish in 
every word and in every work of good. 


3:1 Henceforth, my brethren, pray for us, that 
the word of our Lord may run and be glorified in 
every place, as among you. 

? And that we may be delivered from wicked 
men and perverse; for every man hath not faith. 

° But the Lorn is faithful, who will keep you and 
deliver you from evil. 

* But we confide concerning you in our Lord, 
that what we have commanded you, you have 
done, and also are doing. 

° And our Lord will direct your hearts to the love 
of Aloha, and to the patience of the Meshiha. 

ê But we command you, my brethren, in the 
name of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha, that you 
remove from every brother who walketh 
wickedly, and not according to the precepts 
which he hath’? received from us. 

’ For you know how it behoveth to imitate us 
who walked not wickedly among you. 

è Neither did we eat bread for nothing from any 
one of you; but with labour and weariness by 
night and by day we wrought, that upon no one 
of you we might be burdensome. 

Not because we had not power, but because 
in ourselves we would give you an example, that 
you may imitate us. 

10 For while we were with you, this we 
commanded you, that every one who willeth not 
to work, neither should he eat. 

" For we hear that there are some among you 
who walk wickedly, and nothing work, unless 
vain things. 

12 But these we command, and entreat of them 
by our Lord Jeshu Meshiha, that with quietness 
they work, and eat their (own) bread. 

13 But you, my brethren, be not weary in doing 
what is good. 

14 And if any man hearken not to these our 
words in the epistle, let this be separate from 
you, and be not mixed with him, that he be 
shamed. 

15 Yet, not as an enemy hold him, but admonish 
him as a brother. 

16 But the Lord of peace himself will give you 
peace always, in every thing. Our Lord be with 
you all. 

17 Salutation, by the writing of my hand, |, 
PAULOS, have written; which is the sign in all 
my epistles, so | write. 


493 2 Thess 3:6 — Western Peshitto has “they hast” 


18 The grace of Jeshu Meshiha be with you all, 
my brethren***. Amen. 


494 2 Thess 3:18 — Western Peshitto omits “my 


brethren” 


The First Epistle of Paulos to Timotheos 


1:1 Paulos, an apostle of Jeshu Meshiha, by the 
commandment of Aloha our Saviour, and of 
Jeshu Meshiha our hope; 

? to Timotheos, my true son in the faith: grace 
and mercy and peace from Aloha our Father and 
Jeshu Meshiha our Lord. 

| requested of thee, when | would go into 
Makedunia, to remain at Ephesos, and instruct 
certain men that they teach not various 
doctrines, 

* nor throw themselves (away) upon stories and 
tales of generations which have no end, (but) 
which rather subserve contentions, and not 
edification in the faith of Aloha. 

5 But the end*®° of the commandment is love, 
from a pure heart, and from a good conscience, 
and from genuine faith. 

ê And from them that have erred, and have 
declined to vain words, 

f seeking to become teachers of the law, while 
they understand not what they speak, nor that 
concerning which they contend. 

ê But we know that the law is good, if aman 
according to the law*”° converse in it; 

knowing that against the righteous the law is 
not set, but against the evil, and rebels, and the 
wicked, and sinners, and the dishonest, and 
those who are not pure, and those who strike 
their fathers, and those who strike their mothers, 
and murderers, 

and fornicators, and liers with men, and 
stealers of the free, and liars, and doers against 
an oath and whatever (else) is opposed to the 
healthful doctrine 
11 of the gospel of the glory of the blessed 
Aloha, with which I have been intrusted. 

12 And | thank him who hath empowered me, 
our Lord Jeshu Meshiha, who accounted me 
faithful, and constituted me his minister; 

13 me, who before was a blasphemer, and a 
persecutor, and injurious; but | received mercy, 
because while ignorant | did it, without faith. 

* But in me hath abounded the grace of our 
Lord, and faith and love which are in Jeshu 
Meshiha. 

15 Faithful is the word, and worthy of reception 
that Jeshu the Meshiha came into the world to 
save sinners, of whom | am first. 


21 Timothy 1:5 - Soko, "design or scope" 


Daig Timothy 1:8 - Or, as of the law 


1€ But for this he had compassion upon me, that 
in me first Jeshu Meshiha might show all long- 
suffering, as an exhibition*”” for them who 
should believe in him unto everlasting life. 

7 But to the King who is eternal, incorruptible, 
and unseen, who is one Aloha, be honour and 
glory for ever and ever. Amen. 

This commandment | commit to. thee, my son 
Timotheos, according to the early”? è prophecies 
which were concerning thee, that thou mayest 
war through them this good warfare 

19 with faith and with a good conscience. For 
those who this have put away from them of faith 
have been emptied; 

° as Hymeneos and Alexandros, whom | have 
delivered to Satana, that they may not 
blaspheme. 


2:1 | require“? then from thee, that, before every 
thing supplication be offered to Aloha, and 
prayer and intercession and thanksgiving for all 
men; 

? for kings and princes””’, that an habitation 
quiet and tranquil we may inhabit in all the fear 
of Aloha and purity. 

For this is good and acceptable before Aloha 
our Saviour; 

4 who willeth that all men should be saved, and 
turn to the knowledge of the truth. 

° For one is Aloha, and one is the Mediator of 
Aloha and of men; the man Jeshu Meshiha, 

ê who gave himself a ransom for every man; a 
testimony which cometh in its time, 

7 of which | am constituted an herald and an 
apostle,---I| say the truth and lie not,---to be a 
teacher of the nations in the faith of the truth. 

2 | wish then for men to pray in every place, 

uplifting their hands purely and without wrath 
and without disputations. 

? So also let women with decorous simplicity of 
apparel, with modesty and with chastity, adorn 
themselves, not with braidings, and with gold, 
and with pearls, and with fine vestments, 

10 but with good works, as becometh women 
who profess the fear of Aloha. 

" Let the wife in quietude learn with all 

submission: 


500 


Brg Timothy 1:16 - Or, spectacle 


1 Timothy 1:18 - Or, first 
1 Timothy 2:1 - Boeno, "I request, entreat" 
1 Timothy 2:1 - Or, great ones, rurbonee 


498 
499 
500 


12 for unto the wife to teach’ | permit not, 


neither to be authoritative°”’ over the husband, 
but to be in quietude. 

13 Eor Adam was formed first, then Hava: 

14 and Adam was not deceived, but the wife was 
deceived, and transgressed the commandment. 
15 But she is saved by her children, if they 
continue in faith, and in love, and in 
sanctification, and in chastity. 


3:1 This saying is faithful, that if a man desire 
the presbyterate°’’, a good work he desireth. 

? But it behoveth that a presbyter be as that 
blame be not found in him; and that he be the 
husband of one wife; (a man) who is of a vigilant 
mind, chaste, and orderly, and a lover of guests, 
and instructtul; 

? and not a transgressor over wine, nor (one) 
whose hand hastens to strike; but he is to be 
gentle and not contentious, nor a lover of 
money; 

4 and (one who) ruleth his house well, holding 
his children in subjection with all purity. 

° For if his own house he know not to rule well, 
how is he able to rule the church of Aloha? 

ê Neither shall his discipleship be recent, lest he 
be lifted up, and fall into the judgment of Satana. 
’ But it is needful that he have also a good 
testimony from those without, that he may not 
fall into reproach, and into the net of Satana. 

8 And also the ministers” must be pure, not 
speaking doubly, not inclined to much wine, nor 
shall they love unclean gains. 

* But they shall hold the mystery of the faith with 
a pure conscience. 

'° And these are to be proved first, and then to 
minister, being without blame. 

" Thus also must the woman be chaste, and 
they shall be vigilant (in their) minds, and faithful 
in every thing; and they shall not be accusers. 

12 The ministers shall be (of them) severally 
who have one wife, and shall rule each his 
children and his household well. 

For they who minister well, a good degree 
acquire for themselves, and much openness of 
face in the faith of Jeshu Meshiha. 

“ These | write to thee, hoping soon to come to 
thee; 

15 but if | should delay, that thou mayest know 
how to converse in the house of Aloha, which is 


saa | Timothy 2:12a - Lamlophu, to dogmatize 


1 Timothy 2:12b - Or, daring 
1 Timothy 2:1 - Kashishutho 
1 Timothy 3:8 - M'shamshonee 


502 
503 
504 


the church of Aloha the Living, the column and 
foundation of the truth. 

16 And truly great is this mystery of 
righteousness*”’, which was revealed in the 
flesh, and justified by the Spirit, and seen of 
angels, and preached among the peoples, and 
believed in the world, and taken up into glory. 


4:1 But the Spirit distinctly saith, that in the last 
times some will remove from the faith, and will 
go after deceiving spirits, and after doctrines of 
demons. 
? These, with a false appearance, will deceive, 
speaking a lie, and seared in their conscience, 

and prohibiting to marry, and abstaining from 
meats, which Aloha created to be used with 
thanksgiving by them who believe and know the 
truth; 

because every creature of Aloha is good, and 
nothing to be abominated, if with thanksgiving it 
be received; 
5 for itis sanctified by the word of Aloha, and by 
prayer. 
ê These if thou shalt teach thy brethren, a good 
minister wilt thou be of Jeshu Meshiha, while 
thou wilt be enlarged with words of faith and of 
the good doctrine which thou hast learned. 
’ But from the foolish stories of old women 
abstain; and exercise thy soul in righteousness. 
2 For the exercise of the body a little time 
profiteth; but righteousness in every thing 
profiteth, and hath the promise of the life of this 
time, and of the future. 
? Faithful is the saying and worthy is it of 
reception: 
1° for on this account we labour and are 
reproached, because we hope in Aloha the 
Living, who is the Saviour of all men, and 
especially of the believers. 

"These teach and command. 

And let no man despise thy youth; but be an 
example to the believers in word, and in 
conduct, and in charity, and in faith, and in 
purity. 

13 Till | come be diligent in reading, and in 
prayer, and in teaching. 

Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was 
given thee with prophecy, and the hand-laying’”’ 
of the presbytery. 

In these meditate, and in them be, that it may 
be known to every man that thou goest onward. 

16 And take heed to thyself, and to thy doctrine, 
and persevere in them; for while these thou 
0g Timothy 3:16 - Kinutho 


ai Timothy 4:14 - Sim-yado 


doest, thyself wilt thou save, and them who hear 
thee. 


5:1 An elder do not reprimand, but persuade him 
as a father, and those who are young as thy 
brethren, 

? and the elderly women as mothers, and those 
who are young as thy sisters, with all purity. 

3 The widows honour, them who are widows in 
truth. 

4 And if there be a widow who hath children, or 
children’s children, let them learn first to do justly 
for their families, and to repay the debts (owing) 
to their parents; for this is acceptable before 
Aloha. 

° But she who is truly a widow and solitary (is 
one) whose hope is in Aloha, and who 
persevereth in prayer and in supplication by 
night and by day. 

But she who serveth pleasure is dead while 
she liveth. 

7 These things prescribe to them, that they be 
without blame. 

For if a man hath not care of them who are his 
own, and especially of them who are children of 
the household of faith, he hath denied the faith, 
and is worse than those who believe not. 

* Elect, then, the widow who is not less than 
sixty years, who hath had one husband, 
10 and who hath the testimony of good works: if 
she have brought up children, if she have 
received guests, if she have washed the feet of 
the saints, if she have cheered the afflicted, if 
she have walked in every gracious work. 
" But from the widows who are young, withhold 
(the election); for these become schismatical>” 
against the Meshiha, and seek to marry, 
12 and their condemnation is confirmed, 
because they have rejected their first fidelity. 
13 They also learn idleness, wandering from 
house to house; and not only idleness, but also 
to multiply words, and to follow vain (pursuits), 
and to speak things which they ought not. 

| will therefore that those who are young 
should marry, and bear children, and conduct 
their households, and not give to the adversary 
any occasion to revile. 

For already have some begun to turn aside 
after Satana. 
16 if any believing man or believing woman have 
widows, let them support them, that they may 
not be burdensome on the church, that they who 
are widows indeed may have sufficient. 


ea. Timothy 5:11 - Metstarin, partic. Ethpa. of 


Tsero, Scidit, dilaceravit 


17 Those presbyters who well conduct 
themselves®® shall be worthy of double honour, 
especially they who labour in the word and in 
doctrine. 

18 For the scripture saith, Thou shalt not muzzle 
the ox in the treading out; and, Worthy is the 
labourer of his hire. 

Against a presbyter an accusation receive 
not, except on the mouth of two or three 
witnesses. 

2 Those who sin before all men reprove, that 
the rest may be afraid. 

?1 | attest thee before Aloha and our Lord Jeshu 
Meshiha and his elect angels, that thou keep 
these, (precepts,) and let not thy mind be pre- 
occupied by any thing, and do nothing with 
acceptance of persons. 

*? The hand suddenly on any man lay not, 
neither participate in others’ sins. Keep thyself in 
purity. 

?3 And henceforth water drink not, but wine a 
little drink, on account of thy stomach, and on 
account of thy constant infirmities. 

There are men whose sins are known, and 
they precede them to the place of judgment; and 
there are whose (sins) go after them. 

So also good men are known; and those who 
are otherwise cannot be hid. 


6:1 Let those who are under the yoke of 
servitude hold their masters in all honour, that 
the name of Aloha and his doctrine be not 
blasphemed. 
* But let not those who have believing masters 
slight them, because they are their brethren; but 
serve them the more, because they are 
believers, and beloved who are refreshed by 
their ministry. These things teach and require of 
them. 
° But if there be a man who teacheth other 
doctrine, and who accedeth not to the healthful 
words of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha, and to the 
doctrine of the fear of Aloha, 

this (is one) who extolleth himself while 
knowing nothing, but is infirm with disputation 
and questioning of words, from which are envy, 
and contention, and evil speaking, and 
supposition in the evil mind®’, 

and conflicts of men whose minds are corrupt 
and deprived of the truth, and who consider that 
gain is the fear of Aloha. But thou, remove 
thyself from them. 


an a Timothy 5:17 - D'shaphir methdabrin 


ag Timothy 6:4 - Masom b'reyono bisho 


ê For our gain is great which is the fear of Aloha, 
with the use of our sufficiency”. 

’ For nothing brought we into the world, and we 
know that nothing we are able to take from it. 

è Therefore sufficient to us are food and 
raiment"! 

* But they who will be rich fall into temptations 
and snares, and many lusts which befool and 
injure, and which plunge men into destruction 
and perdition. 

10 For the root of all evil is the love of money; 
and there are who have coveted it, and from the 
faith have erred, and have made themselves 
enter into many sorrows. 

11 But thou, O man of God, from these things 
flee, and follow after righteousness, and after 
equity, and after faith, and after charity, and after 
patience, and after meekness. 

12 And contend in the good agony of faith, and 
lay hold of the life which is eternal, unto which 
thou art called, and hast confessed a good 
confession before many witnesses. 

13 | attest thee before Aloha, who vivifieth all, 
and Jeshu Meshiha, who witnessed before 
Pontius Pilatos the good testimony, 

14 that thou keep (this) commandment without 
spot and without blemish, until the manifestation 
of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha, 

15 whom in his time will show Aloha the blessed 
and only Strong One, the King of kings, and 
Lord of lords; 
1€ he who only is incorruptible, and (who) 
dwelleth in light which no man can approach; 
whom no man of men hath seen, nor is able to 
see: to him be honour and power for ever and 
ever. Amen. 

17 The rich of this world instruct, that they be not 
uplifted in their minds, nor be trustful upon riches 
which have no security, but upon Aloha the 
living, who giveth to us all abundantly for our 
comfort; 

18 and that they perform good works, and 
become rich in well-doings, and be ready to give 
and to communicate, 

19 and lay for themselves a good foundation for 
that which is to be, that they may lay hold on the 
true life. 

20 O Timothy, watch over that which is confided 
to thee, and fly from vain words°"’, and the 
turnings of false knowledge. 

?1 For they who pursue it err from the faith. 
Grace be with thee. Amen. 

Pai: Timothy 6:6 — Bachshachtho demesthan 
ig Timothy 6:8 - Or, covering 


512 1 Timothy 6:20 - B'noth kolee seriktho, vain voices 


The Second Epistle of Paulos to Timotheos 


1:1 Paulos, an apostle of Jeshu Meshiha by the 
will of Aloha, and on account of the promise of 
life which is in Jeshu Meshiha, 

? to Timotheos my beloved son: grace and 
mercies and peace from Aloha our Father, and 
from our Lord Jeshu Meshiha. 

3 | thank Aloha, whom I serve from my fathers 
with a pure conscience, that constantly | 
remember thee in my prayers of the night and of 
the day; 

* and have longed to see thee, being mindful of 
thy tears, that | may be filled with joy: 

° in remembrance of thee (and) of thy true faith 
which dwelt first in the mother of thy mother 
Lois, and in thy mother Eunika, and which, | am 
persuaded, (is) in thee also. 

ê On account of this | put thee in mind to keep 
awake the gift of Aloha, which is in thee by the 
laying on of my hands. 

’ For Aloha hath not given to us the spirit of 
fear, but of power and of love and of 
discipline°’’. 

8 Wherefore be not thou ashamed of the 
testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner; but 
sustain evil with the gospel, through the power 
of Aloha, 

? who hath saved us, and called us with an holy 
calling; not according to our works, but 
according to his will, and that grace of his which 
was given to us in Jeshu Meshiha before the 
time of the worlds, 

10 and is now revealed by the revelation of our 
Saviour Jeshu Meshiha, who hath abolished 
death, and hath demonstrated life and 
incorruption, through the gospel, 

11 of which | am appointed an herald and an 
apostle and a teacher of the nations: 

12 on account of which | suffer these, and am 
not ashamed. | know in whom | have believed, 
and am persuaded that there is power in his 
hands my deposite to keep for me unto that day. 
13 Let the outline°’* of sound words be with 
thee, which thou hast heard from me, with the 
faith and love which are in Jeshu Meshiha: 


ea! Timothy 1:7 - Marathyonutho 


2 Timothy 1:13 - Or, model: chauro, 
from chor, "to look at with attention, to 
contemplate." Melee chlimotho may be 
rendered "healthy words, or wholesome 
doctrines." 


514 


14 that good deposit keep through the Spirit of 
Holiness who dwelleth in us. 

15 Know this, that all those of Asia are turned 
from me, of whom are Phygellos and 
Harmogenes. 

16 Our Lord give mercies to the house of 
Onesiphoros, who many times hath refreshed 
me, and of the chains of my bonds hath not 
been ashamed. 

17 But when also he came to Ruma, with 
diligence he sought me, and found me. 

18 Our Lord grant that he may find mercies with 
our Lord in that day: and how he ministered to 
me in Ephesos thou especially knowest. 


2:1 Thou therefore, my son, be strong in the 
grace of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha. 

And those (doctrines) which thou hast heard 
from me by many witnesses, them commit to 
faithful men, who are also able to teach others. 

3 And endure evils as a good soldier of Jeshu 
Meshiha. 

No man serveth as a soldier, and entangleth 
himself with the affairs of the world, that he 
might please him who hath chosen him. 

And if one contendeth, he is not crowned, 
unless according to his law he contend. 

It becometh the husbandman who laboureth 
that he should first eat of his fruits. 

Understand what | say to thee. Our Lord give 
thee wisdom in all things. 

è Remember Jeshu Meshiha, that he arose from 

among the dead, he who is of the seed of David, 

according to my gospel; 

? for which | endure evils unto bonds, as an evil- 

doer: but the word of Aloha is not bound. 

1° Therefore | endure every thing on account of 

the elect, that they also may find salvation in 

Jeshu Meshiha, with the glory that is eternal. 

"' Faithful is the word: For if we be dead with 

him, With him also we shall live; 

12 And if we endure, We shall also reign with 

him; But, if we deny him, He also will deny us! 

13 And if we believe him not, He in his 

faithfulness abideth; For deny himself he cannot. 
Of these (truths) remind them, and testify 

before our Lord, that they contend not with 

unprofitable words, to the overturning of those 

who hear them. 

15 And be careful to establish thyself perfectly 

before Aloha, a workman without shame, 

preaching rightly the word of truth. 


1€ Erom vain words which have no utility in them 
withdraw; for they add greatly to the wickedness 
of those who are occupied with them. 

7 And their words as an eating cancer will lay 
hold upon many: but one of them is Hymeneos, 
and another Philetos, 

18 who have erred from the truth, saying, that 
the resurrection of the dead hath been, and the 
faith of some overturning. 

19 But the true foundation of Aloha standeth; 
and it hath this signature: And the Lord knoweth 
them who are his. And, Let every one who 
invoketh the name of the Lord depart from 
iniquity. 

*° But in a great house there are not vessels of 
gold only or of silver, but also of wood, also of 
clay: of them (some are) to honour, and of them 
(some) to dishonour 

=" lf a man then purify himself from these, he 
will be a pure vessel unto honour, fitted for the 
use of his Lord, and prepared for every good 
work. 

? From all the lusts of youth escape; and 
pursue’ after righteousness, and faith, and 
charity, and peace, with them who call upon the 
Lord with a pure heart. 

?3 From foolish controversies which are without 
instruction withdraw; for thou knowest that they 
beget strifes”"®. 

* But a servant of the Lord oweth not to 
strive”, but to be gentle towards every man, 
and teaching, and long-suffering, 

*° that he may instruct them who would contend 
against him with meekness, if by any means 
Aloha may give them conversion, and they may 
acknowledge the truth, 

ê and be mindful of themselves, and remove 
from the snare of Satana, by whom they have 
been entrapped at his will. 


3:1 But know this, that in the last days hard 
times will come; 
? and men will be lovers of themselves, and 
lovers of money, boastful, lofty, blasphemous, to 
their men not obedient, deniers of grace, 
impious, 

3 calumniators, subjected to lust, brutal, haters 
of the good, 

traitors, impetuous” f è puffed up, lovers of 
lusts rather than the love of Aloha; 


ay Timothy 2:22 - Or, run after 


2 Timothy 2:23 - Fightings 
2 Timothy 2:24 - Fight 
2 Timothy 3:4 - Or, hasty 


516 
517 
518 


5 having a form of the worship of Aloha, but 
from the power of Aloha afar off: (them) who are 
such put from thee. 

ê For of them are they who creep into houses, 
and captivate women who are overladen with 
sins, and led away by divers lusts; 

7 who, in all time learning, never to the 
knowledge of the truth are able to come. 

ê But as Yonis and Yanbris stood against 
Musha, so also these stand against the truth: 
men whose understanding is corrupted, and 
reprobate from the faith. 

* But they shall not come further, for their folly is 
known to all men, as also of them it is known. 

But thou hast followed"? my doctrine and my 
manners, and my purpose, and my faith, and my 
prolongedness of mind, and my charity, and my 
patience, 

" and my persecution, and my sufferings. And 
thou knowest what things | endured in Antioch, 
and in Ikonion, and in Lystra, what persecution | 
endured; and out of all these my Lord delivered 
me. 

1? But all they who will in the fear of Aloha to live 
in Jeshu Meshiha, are persecuted. 

13 But wicked men and seducers add to their 
wickedness, deceiving, and being deceived. 

* But abide thou in those things that thou hast 
learned, and in which thou art confirmed; for 
thou knowest from whom thou hast learned: 

15 and that from thy childhood thou hast learned 
the holy writings, which are able to make thee 
wise to salvation, through faith which is in Jeshu 
Meshiha. 

16 For all scripture which from the Spirit is 
written, is profitable for doctrine, and for rebuke, 
and for correction, and for instruction??? which is 
in | righteousness: 

7 that the man of God may be perfect unto 
every good work, and completed. 


4:1 | attest thee before Aloha, and our Lord 
Jeshu Meshiha, who is to judge the living and 
the dead at the revelation of his kingdom: 
preach the word, and stand with diligence in 
season, and (that) which is not season; confute, 
and rebuke with all prolongedness of mind and 
doctrine. 
3 For the time will come, when sound doctrine 
they will not hear; but according to their desires 
will multiply to themselves teachers, in the 
itching of their hearing. 


ae) Timothy 3:10 - Ath ethaith bothar 


zen Timothy 3:16 - Or, discipline 


* And from the truth they will turn away their ear, 
but to fables will decline. 

° But watch thou in every thing, and endure 
evils, and work the work of an evangelist, and 
thy ministry fulfil. 

ê But | am sacrificed, and the time when | shall 
be dissolved cometh. 

7 The good agony I have fought, and my 
running | have completed, and my faith | have 
kept. 

è And from now there is kept for me the crown 
of righteousness, which my Lord will give me in 
that day, because he is a righteous judge; yet, 
not only to me, but to all them who love his 
manifestation. 

* Be careful to come to me speedily; 

10 for Dema hath left me, and hath loved this 
world, and is gone to Thessalonika; Krispos to 
Galatia, Titos to Dalmatia; 

Luka only is with me. Take Markos and bring 
him with thee; for helpful to me is he in the 
ministry. 

12 But Tykikos have | sent to Ephesos. 

13 The case (for) books which I left at Troas with 
Karpos, when thou comest bring, and the books, 
and especially the roll of parchments. 

Alexander the brass-worker many evils hath 
showed me: our Lord awardeth to him according 
to his deeds. 

15 But be thou also aware of him, for he is much 
uplifted against our words. 

' In the first defence no man was with me, but 
all of them left me. May this not be reckoned to 
them! 

” But my Lord stood with me, that by me the 
preaching might be fulfilled, and (that) all the 
Gentiles might hear: and | was delivered from 
the mouth of the lion. 

18 And my Lord will deliver me from every evil 
work, and will save me into his kingdom, which 
is in heaven. To Him be glory for ever and ever. 
Amen. 

19 Give salutation to Priskela, and to Akilos, and 
to the house of Onesiphoros. 

Erastos remains at Kurinthos; but Trophimos 
I left ill in Miletos the city. 

?1 Be careful to come before winter. Ebulos and 
Pudis, and Linos, and Klaudia, and all the 
brethren, ask for your peace. 

?2? Our Lord Jeshu Meshiha be with thy spirit. 
Grace be with thee’. Amen. 


ae Timothy 4:22 — Western Peshitto has “with you” 


The Epistle of Paulos to Titos 


1:1 Paulos, a servant of Aloha, and apostle of 
Jeshu Meshiha, for the faith of the chosen ones 
of Aloha, and the knowledge of the truth which is 
in the fear of Aloha; 

? unto the hope of eternal life, which Aloha the 
true counselled before the times of the ages, 

and his word hath revealed in his time by our 
preaching, which was confided to me by the 
command of Aloha our Saviour: 

* -To Titos, my true son in the common faith. 
Grace and peace from Aloha the Father and 
from our Lord Jeshu Meshiha our Saviour. 

° For this | left thee in Kreta, that those things 
which were wanting thou mayest rectify, and 
constitute presbyters in every city as | 
commanded thee. 

ê Him who is without blame, and is”? the 
husband of one wife, and who hath believing 
children, who are not vicious nor addicted to 
intemperance. 

‘Fora presbyter is bound to be without blame, 
as the steward of Aloha; he shall not be led by 
the will of self, nor be irascible, nor a 
transgressor over wine, neither shall his hand be 
hasty to strike, nor shall he be a lover of sordid 

ains. 

But he shall be a lover of guests, and a lover 
of the good, and be chaste, and equitable, and 
holy, and withholding himself from lusts; 

and careful over the doctrine of the word of 
faith, that he may be able also to comfort by his 
teaching the healthy, and to reprove those who 
are contentious. 

10 For there are many who are not in subjection, 
and whose words are vain, and make the minds 
of men to err, especially those of the 
circumcision, 

11 those, whose mouths it behoves to stop. 
Many houses they destroy, and teach what they 
ought not, for the sake of filthy gain. 

12 One of them, a prophet of their own, hath 
said, The sons of Kreta are always liars, evil 
beasts, and lazy bellies. 

13 And true is this testimony. Wherefore reprove 
them severely, that they may be sound in the 
faith, 

14 nor cast themselves to the fables of the 
Jihudoyee, and to the mandates of men who 
hate the truth. 


522 Titus 1:6 - Or, Vavo, and hath been 


15 For every thing is pure to the pure; but to 
those who are polluted and unfaithful nothing is 
pure; but their understanding and their 
conscience are polluted. 

16 And they profess to know Aloha, but in their 
works they deny him, and are abominable and 
disobedient, and reprobate to every good work. 


2:1 But speak thou that which becometh sound 
doctrine, 

? and teach, That the elders be watchful in their 
minds, and be chaste and pure, and sound in 
the faith, and in charity, and in patience. 

3 And so also the aged women, that they be in 
behaviour what becometh the fear of Aloha, and 
not slanderers, nor enslaved to much wine, and 
that they teach good things; 

4 making those who are young modest, to love 
their husbands and their children, 

5 and to be chaste and holy, well mindful of their 
houses, and submissive to their husbands, that 
no man blaspheme the word of Aloha. 

ê And of those who are young men, likewise, 
require that they be chaste. 

But in every thing show thyself the example in 
all good works, and in doctrine let there be with 
thee sound speech 

which is sincere and incorrupt, and which no 
man will despise, that he who riseth against us 
may be ashamed when he cannot say any thing 
hateful against us. 

? Let servants to their masters be submissive in 
every thing, and please them, not contradicting, 

1 nor pilfering; but let them show their good- 
trustiness””’ in every thing, that they may adorn 
in every thing the doctrine of Aloha our Saviour. 

" For the all-saving grace of Aloha” hath 
appeared to all men, 

12 and teacheth us to deny wickedness and the 
lusts of the world, and to live in this world in 
purity, and in rectitude, and in the fear of Aloha, 

13 while expecting the blessed hope and the 
manifestation of the glory of the great God and 
our Saviour Jeshu Meshiha; 

14 who gave himself for us, to redeem us from 
all iniquity, and to cleanse unto himself a new 
people’, who are zealous of good works. 


523 Titus 2:10 - Shararhun tobo 


Titus 2:11 - Or, the grace of Aloha saving all 
Titus 2:14 - Amo chadtho 


524 
525 


' These speak, and require”, and maintain 
with all authority, and no man shall despise thee. 


3:1 Put them in mind that to princes and to 
powers they are to hearken and to be obedient, 
and to be prepared for every good work. 
? And against no man to rail, nor be contentious, 
but gentle, and in every thing to show their 
benignity towards all men. 
° For we also were aforetime without 
understanding, and disobedient and erring, and 
were subjected to various lusts; and in malice, 
and in envy we conversed, and were hateful, 
and also hating one another. 

But when appeared the goodness and mercy 
of Aloha our Saviour, 
* not by works of righteousness which we had 
done, but by his own mercy he saved us, by the 
laving of the birth which is afresh, by the 
renewing of the Spirit of Holiness, 
ê which he shed upon us abundantly, by Jeshu 
Meshiha our Saviour; 
7 that by his grace we might be justified, and be 
made heirs according to the hope of the life 
which is eternal. 
è Faithful is the word; and in this | will that thou 
also establish them, that they should be careful 
to perform good works, they who have believed 
in Aloha. These are good and profitable unto 
men. 
* But from foolish disputations, and from tales of 
genealogies, and from contentions, and strifes of 
the sophree”™”, withdraw; for profit is not in them, 
and they are vain. 
10 From an heretical man, after one time and 
twice thou hast admonished him, withdraw; 
" and know that he who is such is perverse, 
and sinneth, and condemneth himself. 
12? When I have sent to thee Artema, or Tykikos, 
be careful to come to me at Nikopolis; for there | 
have determined in my mind to winter. 
13 But concerning Zina the sophra, and Apolo, 
be careful to provide them well, that nothing may 
be wanting to them. 
14 And let those also who are of us, learn to 
perform good works in things which are 
necessary, that they may not be without fruits. 
15 All they who are with me ask for thy peace. 
Ask for the peace of all who love us in the faith. 
Grace be with all of you. Amen. 


526 Titus 2:15 - Or, exhort 


527 Titus 3:9 - Scribes 


The Epistle to Philemon 


1:1 Paulos, the bondman of Jeshu Meshiha, and 
the brother Timotheos, to the beloved Philemon, 
our fellow-labourer’~, 

and to our beloved Aphia, and to Arkipos our 
fellow-labourer, and to the church which is in thy 
house. 

3 Grace be with thee, and peace, from Aloha 
our Father, and from our Lord Jeshu Meshiha. 
“| give thanks to Aloha at all time, and 
remember thee in my prayers. 

° Behold, from (the time) when I heard of thy 
faith, and the love which thou hast to our Lord 
Jeshu Meshiha, and to all the saints, 

ê (I have prayed) that there may be 
communication of thy faith (in) yielding fruits, in 
works and in the (manifestation of the) 
knowledge of all good which thou hast in Jeshu 
Meshiha. 

’ For we have great joy and consolation, that by 
thy love the bowels of the saints are refreshed. 

ê Wherefore I have great confidence in the 
Meshiha to command thee those acts which are 
righteous, 

* but for love’s sake entreating | entreat of thee, 
|, Paulos, who am the aged as thou knowest, but 
now also the bondman of Jeshu Meshiha. 

10 And | entreat of thee for my son, whom I have 
begotten in my bonds, Onesimos, who once was 
of no use to thee, 

"but (who will) now to thee, as also to me, be 
greatly useful; 

12 and | have sent him to thee. But thou, as 
(one) who is my offspring, so receive him. 

13 For | would have retained him with me, that 
he might have served me for thy sake in the 
bonds of the gospel; 

14 but without thy counsel | was not willing to do 
any thing, that thy goodness might not be as by 
constraint, but of thy will. 

15 But, perhaps, for this he passed away for an 
hour, that thou mayest hold him for ever; 
1€ not henceforth as a servant, but as more than 
a servant, a beloved brother of mine, and how 
much more of thine, both in the flesh and in our 
Lord! 

17 If then thou art with me a partaker, receive 
him as mine. 

18 And if of any thing he hath deprived thee, or 
oweth, that reckon unto me. 


528 Philemon 1:1 - Or, the labourer who is with us 


19 |, Paulos, have written with my hands, | will 

repay thee; for | will not tell thee that thou owest 

thyself to me. 

*° Yes, my brother, | will be refreshed by thee in 

our Lord; refresh my bowels in the Meshiha. 
Because | am confident of thy hearing me, | 

have written to thee, and | know that more than | 

have asked thou wilt do. 

?? But at once also prepare me a house of 

lodging, for | hope through your prayers | shall 

be given to you. 

?3 Epaphra, a captive with me in Jeshu 

Meshiha, 

*4 and Markos, and Aristarkos, and Dema, and 

Luka, my helpers, ask for your peace. 

*° The grace of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha be with 

your spirit, my brethren. Amen. 


The Epistle to The Ebroyee 


1:1 In manifold portions’, and in all manners, 
spake Aloha with our fathers by the prophets 
from the first: but in these last days he hath 
spoken with us by his Son; 

whom he constituted the heir of every thing, 
and by whom he made the worlds; 

3 who himself is the resplendence of his glory, 
and the image of his Being, and upholdeth all 
(things) by the power of his word; and he, in his 
(own) person, hath made purification of sins, 
and hath sat down at the right hand of the 
Majesty on high?’ 

* And this (person) is altogether more excellent 
than the angels, by so much as the name he 
hath inherited (is) more excellent than theirs. 

° For unto which one from (among) the angels 
at any time said Aloha, Thou art MY SON; | to- 
day have begotten thee? And again, | will be to 
him the Father, and he shall be to me the Son? 
ê But again, when bringing in the First-begotten 
into the world, he said, Let all the angels of 
Aloha worship him. 

’ But concerning the angels, thus hath he 
spoken: Who hath made his angels spirit, and 
his ministers a flaming fire. 

è But concerning the Son he hath said, Thy 
throne, Aloha, (is) for ever and ever, a right 
sceptre (is) the sceptre of thy kingdom. 

Thou hast loved righteousness, and hast 
hated iniquity; therefore Aloha thy God hath 
anointed thee with the oil of exultation more 
(abundantly) than thy fellows. 

10 And again, Thou in the beginning hast laid 
the foundations of the earth, and the heavens 
are the work of thy hands. 

" They pass away, but thou art enduring; and 
all they as vestments shall become old, 

12 and as a garment thou shalt fold them up, 
they shall be changed; but thou (shalt be) as 
Thou Art, and thy years shall not fail??? 

13 But to which from (among) the angels hath he 
said at any time, Sit at my right hand, until | put 
thine adversaries a footstool beneath thy feet? 

14 Are not all they spirits of ministration, who 
(are) sent forth in service on behalf of those who 
are hereafter to inherit salvation? 


52 Hebrews 1:1 - B'cull manon, in all portions 


Hebrews 1:3 - The Greatness in the high places 
Hebrews 1:8 - Or, perfect, true 
Hebrews 1:12 - Or, shall not complete 


530 
531 
532 


2:1 Therefore we are obligated to be more 
exceedingly heedful in what we have heard, that 
we fall not. 

* For if the word which was uttered by angels 
was confirmed, and every one who heard it, and 
transgressed against it, received a just 
retribution”, 

> how shall we escape if we despise those 
(words) which themselves are our salvation? 
Those [namely] which began by our Lord to be 
spoken, and by them who from him heard them 
in us were confirmed, 

“ when Aloha witnessed concerning them by 
signs, and by miracles, and by various powers, 
and by distributed gifts°** of the Spirit of 
Holiness, that were bestowed according to his 
will. 

° For it was not to the angels he subjected the 
world which is future”, of which we discourse. 
ê But, as the scripture testifieth and saith, What 
is man, that thou rememberedst him, and the 
Son of man, that thou didst visit him? 

7 Thou didst humble him (to be) less than the 
angels; glory and honour hast thou placed upon 
his head, and hast empowered him over the 
work of thy hands, 

è and every thing hast thou put in subjection 
under his feet. [Now] in this, that he subjected 
every thing to him, he hath left nothing which he 
hath not subjected. Yet hitherto we see not that 
every thing is subjected to him. 

? But him who was humbled to be less than the 
angels, we see to be JESHU himself, for the 
sake of the passion of his death; and glory and 
honour set upon his head; for He Aloha®”’, in his 
grace, for every man hath tasted death!°°” 

10 For it was proper to him by whose hand are 
all, and on account of whom all are, (and who) 
would lead many sons to his glory, that the 
Prince”? of their salvation by sufferings should 
be perfected. 


533 Hebrews 2:2 - A retribution in righteousness 


Hebrews 2:4 - Distributions, or dividings 
Hebrews 2:5 - Olmo dathid, Heb: Olam habo 
Hebrews 2:9a - Hu ger Aloho 

Hebrews 2:9b — Eastern Peshitta has “for He, in 
the place of everyone apart from God, hath tasted 
death” 

538 Hebrews 2:10 - Or, Head 


534 
535 
536 
537 


" For he who sanctified, and they who are 
sanctified, are all from one: wherefore he has 
not been ashamed to call them his brethren. 

12 (As) when he saith, I will announce thy name 
unto my brethren, and in the midst of the church 
| will praise thee. 

? And again, | will put my confidence in him. 
And again, Behold me, and the sons whom thou 
hast given me, Aloha. 

“ Forasmuch as the sons have been made to 
participate in flesh and blood, he also likewise 
was made a partaker of these very things; that 
by his death he might abolish him who held the 
power of death, who is Satana, 

° and set loose them who in the fear of death 
had been all their lives subjected to servitude. 
1€ For not from the angels he took™, but from 
the seed of Abraham he took.” 

’ Therefore it was right that in every thing he 
should be rendered like unto his brethren, that 
he might be compassionate, and a High Priest 
faithful in [things pertaining] to Aloha, and 
become an expiation for the sins of the people. 

è For in this, that he hath suffered and been 
tempted, he is able to help those who are 
tempted. 


3:1 Wherefore, my holy brethren, who have 
been called with the calling that [is] from heaven, 
contemplate this Apostle and High Priest of our 
confession, JESHU MESHIHA! 
? who was faithful to him who made him, as 
(was) Musha in all his house. 
3 For greater is the glory of this (One) by far 
than (the glory) of Musha, even as the honour of 
him who built the house is far greater than [that 
of] his building. 

4 For every house by some man is builded; but 
He who built all [things] is Aloha. 
° And Musha, as a servant, was faithful in all his 
house, for the testimony of those [things] that 
were to be announced by him™ 
ê but the Meshiha as THE SON over his [own] 
house: and his house are we, if, unto the end, 
we shall hold fast our confidence™”, and the 
triumph“? of his hope. 


539 Hebrews 2:16a - Men malakee nasab 


Hebrews 2:16b — Western Peshitto has “For not 
over the Angels was death authorized, but over the 
children of Abraham it was authorized” 

>” Hebrews 3:5 - By his hand 

Hebrews 3:6a - Retain our openness of faces 
Hebrews 3:6b - The glorying 


540 


542 
543 


7 Therefore the Spirit of Holiness hath said, To- 
day if ye will hear his voice, 

è harden not your hearts unto jhe angering of 
him, as (did) the embitterers*™*, and as the day 
of temptation in the desert, 

? when your fathers tempted me, and proved 
(and) saw my works forty years. 

"© On which account | was wearied with that 
generation; and said, It is a people that doth err 
(in) their heart, and that hath not known my 
ways. 

1! So that | sware in my wrath, that they should 
not enter into my rest. 

Beware, therefore, my brethren, lest there be 
in any man among you an evil heart which 
believeth not, and ye depart from Aloha the 
living. 

13 But examine yourselves all the days, until the 
day which is called THAT DAY”®, lest any one 
of you be hardened by the deceptiveness of sin. 

For we are made participators with®”* the 
Meshiha, if, from the beginning and unto the 
end, in this very standing we steadfastly persist. 

5 As that it is said, To-day, if ye will hear his 
voice”, harden not your hearts to provoke him. 

For who are they who heard and provoked 
him? Not all they who came out of Metsreen by 
the hand of Musha. 

17 And with whom was he wearied forty years, 
but with them who sinned, and whose bones fell 
in the desert? 

18 And of whom did he swear that they should 
not enter into his rest, but of them who would not 
be persuaded? 

? And we see that they were not able to enter 
in, because they did not believe. 


4:1 Let us fear, therefore, lest, while there is a 
confirmed promise of an entrance into his rest, 
any one shall be found among you remaining 
from entering in. 

? For we have been evangelized as well as 
they: but the word which they heard did not profit 
them, because not contempered with faith in 
them who heard it. 

° But we enter into the rest, we (being of) those 
(who) have believed. But as He hath said, So | 
sware in my wrath, that they should not enter 


544 
Hebrews 3:8 - Memarmaronee 


Hebrews 3:13 - Yaumono, q. s. yaumo hono 
Hebrews 3:14 - Or, are conjoined with 

Hebrews 3:15 - Bath-Koleh, the sound of his voice 
“daughter voice” “heavenly voice” 


545 
546 
547 


into my rest: for, behold, the works of Aloha from 
the beginning of the world were. 

* As he said concerning the shabath, God 
rested on the seventh day from all his works. 

° Yet here again he saith, They shall not enter 
into my rest. 

ê Therefore, because there was a place”? into 
which every one of them might have entered, 
and they who had it announced first did not 
enter in, forasmuch as they would not be 
persuaded; 

7 _.-moreover, (as) another day he appointeth, 
after much time; as above it is written, that David 
hath said, To-day if his voice ye will hear, 
harden not your hearts; 

è -but if Jeshu-bar-Nun had established them 
in rest™®, he [would] not have spoken afterwards 
of another day: 

* ---Therefore, yet to enjoy a shabathism>”’ is 
confirmed to the people of Aloha. 

10 For he who is entered into his rest hath also 
reposed himself from his works, as Aloha (did) 
from his. 

" Let us, therefore, anxiously endeavour to 
enter into that rest, that we fall not after the 
manner of those who were not persuaded. 

For living is the Word of Aloha, and all-acting, 
and more penetrating than a two-edged 
sword’, and entereth to the separation of the 
soul and the spirit, and of the joints, and of the 
marrow, and the bones, and discerneth the 
reasonings and counsel of the heart. 

13 Neither is there any creature that is 
concealed from before him; but every thing (is) 
naked and manifest before his eyes, to whom 
they shall give account’. 

14 Therefore having such a great High Priest, 
Jeshu Meshiha, the Son of Aloha, who hath 
ascended to heaven, let us persevere in the 
confession of him. 

15 For we have not an high priest who cannot 
suffer along with our infirmity, but (one) who, 
[having been] tempted in every thing as we, 
(was) separate from sin. 

1ê Let us therefore approach with confidence” 
to the throne of his grace, that we may receive 


“8 Hebrews 4:6 - Athro, a region 


Hebrews 4:8 - Given them rest 

Hebrews 4:9 — Lemashbothu, celebration of 
shabath 

°°? Hebrews 4:12 - The sword of two mouths 
Hebrews 4:13 - D'leh yohbin pethgomo, to whom 
giving the answer 

3 Hebrews 4:16 - With revealed eye 


549 
550 


552 


mercy”, and find grace for help in the time of 
affliction. 


5:1 For every high priest who is from among 
men, on the behalf of men, standeth over those 
things which are of Aloha, to offer oblation and 
sacrifices for sins: 

? and (is one) who can humble himself, and 
suffer with those who know not and err, since he 
also himself with infirmity is clothed. 

3 And on this account he is obligated as on the 
behalf of the people, so (also) for himself, to 
offer up for his sins. 

Yet no man to himself taketh the honour, but 
he who is called by Aloha, as of Aharun®®™. 

° Thus also the Meshiha glorified not himself to 
be a High Priest; but He [invested him with that 
office] who said to him, Thou art my Son, | to- 
day have begotten thee. 

So, too, in another place he saith, Thou art the 

Priest for ever, after the likeness of Malki-Zedek. 

When also with flesh he had been clothed, 
prayer and supplication, with a powerful cry, and 
with tears, he offered up unto Him who was able 
from death to revive him, and was heard. 

2 And though he was the Son, yet from the fear 
and the sufferings which he sustained he 
learned obedience. 

? And so was he perfected, and became unto all 
them who obey him the Cause of eternal 
salvation; 

10 and was named by God, The High Priest after 
the likeness of Malki-Zedek. 

" But concerning this Malki-Zedek himself, we 
have much discourse to utter, and [which is] 
hard to explain, because ye are infirm in your 
hearing. 

12 For ye ought to be teachers, on account of 
the time [occupied] by you in learning; but now 
ye have need again to be taught those which are 
the first scriptures of the beginning words of 
Aloha; and need have ye for milk, and not for 
solid food. 

But every one whose food is milk is not 
versed in the doctrine of righteousness, because 
he is a babe. 

14 But for the perfect is solid food; those, 
(namely,) who, because exercised, have trained 
their senses to distinguish the good and the evil. 


6:1 Wherefore let us leave the beginning of the 
word of the Meshiha, and let us come unto 

4 Hebrews 4:16 - Mercies 

Hebrews 5:4 - Methkree men Aloha aicano 
d'Aharun 


555 


perfection. Or why again another foundation lay 
you for repentance from dead works, and for 
faith which is in Aloha, 

? and for the doctrine of ablution, and of 
imposition of the hand, and for the resurrection 
from the place of the dead, and for the judgment 
which is eternal? 

° If the Lord permit, we will do this. 

* But they who once unto baptism have 
descended”, and have tasted the gift which is 
from heaven, and have received the Spirit of 
Holiness, 

° and have tasted the good word of Aloha, and 
the power of the world to come, 

(and) who again shall sin, cannot again be 
renewed unto conversion, who would afresh 
crucify and put to shame the Son of God. 

’ For the earth that hath drunk the rain which 
hath come upon it many times, and shall have 
brought forth the herb that is useful for them on 
whose account it is cultured, receiveth blessing 
from Aloha; 

ê? but that which shall produce thorns and briers 
hath reprobation; nor is it far from the curse, but 
its end is burning. 

But we are persuaded concerning you, my 
brethren, those things which are good, and that 
draw nigh unto salvation, though thus we speak. 

10 For not unrighteous is Aloha, that he should 
forget your works and your charity which ye 
have manifested in his name, who have 
ministered unto the saints, and do minister. 

" But we desire that every one of you manifest 
the same diligence for the full completion of your 
hope until the end; 

12 and that it be not cut off from you°’”, but that 
ye be imitators of them who by fidelity and 
patience” have become heirs of the promise. 

13 For when to Abraham Aloha gave promise, 
because there was no one greater than himself 
to swear by, he sware by his own Self, 

14 and said, Blessing | will bless thee, and 
multiplying | will multiply thee. 

15 And so he waited patiently, and obtained the 
promise. 

For men swear by one greater than 
themselves: and every controversy which occurs 
among them hath a sure conclusion in the oath. 

17 On this account Aloha, willing abundantly to 
manifest to the heirs of the promise that his 


56 Hebrews 6:4 - Honun d'chado zaban 
I'mahmuditho nechathu 
°°? Hebrews 6:12a - Tethkatao lecun 


°°8 Hebrews 6:12b - Prolongedness of spirit 


engagement is changeless, hath bound it in an 
oath: 

18 that by two things that are not changed, in 
which it cannot be that Aloha should lie, great 
consolation should be ours who have fled unto 
him: and that we may retain the hope that is 
promised to us, 

19 [and] which we have as an anchor that 
holdeth our soul, that it may not be moved, and 
entereth within the veil, 

20 where Jeshu hath first entered for us, and 
become the Priest for ever in the likeness of 
MALKI-ZEDEK. 


7:1 For this Malki-Zedek is king of Sholim, the 
priest of Aloha the Most High. And he (it was 
who) met Abraham when he returned from the 
slaughter of the kings, and blessed him. 

? And to him Abraham separated the tenth from 
every thing which he had with him. Now his 
name, being expounded, (is,) the King of 
Righteousness; and again, Malek Sholem, 
which is, King of peace: 

3 whose father and mother were not written in 
the genealogies; neither the beginning of his 
days, nor the conclusion of his life; but in the 
likeness (of that) of THE SON OF ALOHA 
standeth his priesthood for ever. 

* But see how great this (person was,) that 
Abraham, head of the fathers, gave to him the 
tenths and the choicest things. 

° For they of the sons of Levi who have received 
the priesthood, have a commandment of the law 
to receive tenths from the people, they from their 
brethren, they also from the loins of Abraham 
having sprung. 

ê But he who is not written in their genealogies 
took tithes from ABRAHAM, and blessed him 
who had received the promise. 

7 But, without controversy, he who is less is 
blessed by one who is Greater than himself. 

è And here the sons of men who die receive the 
tithes; but there [it was] he concerning whom the 
scripture testifieth that he liveth. 

And as one may say, by the hand of Abraham, 
even Levi, he who taketh tithes, himself also is 
tithed. 

1° For he was yet in the loins of his father when 
he met Malki-Zedek. 

1! If, therefore, Perfection®’ were to be through 
the priesthood of the Levoyee, by which the law 
has been put upon the people, why was there 
another Priest required, who should arise in the 


59 Hebrews 7:11 - Or, the consummation 


resemblance of Malki-Zedek? For he had said, 
In the likeness of Aharun he shall be. 

1? But as a change hath been made in the 
priesthood, so is there also a change made in 
the law. 

13 For he concerning whom these things are 
said was born from another tribe, from which no 
man hath ministered at the altar. 

14 Eor it is manifest that from Jihuda arose our 
Lord, from the tribe of whom Musha hath said 
nothing concerning priesthood. 

13 And again: it is more fully known by that 
which [Aloha] hath said, In the likeness of 

Malki Zedek ariseth another Priest; 

1€ who was made not by the law of bodily 
commandments, but in the power of a life which 
is indissoluble. 

17 Eor he testifieth concerning him, Thou arta 
Priest for evermore according to the likeness of 
Malki-Zedek. 

18 But the change which was made in the first 
institution was on account of its powerlessness, 
and because profit was not in it. 

19 For the law perfected nothing: but instead of it 
a hope has entered which is more excellent, 
(and) by which we are brought nigh unto Aloha. 
2 And he hath confirmed it unto us in an oath. 
21 For they were made priests without an oath; 
but this [one] with an oath: as he said unto him 
by the hand of David, The Lord hath sworn and 
will not lie, that thou art the Priest for ever in the 
likeness of Malki-Zedek. 

”? In all this more excellent is the covenant of 
(which) Jeshu is the sponsor”. 

?3 There were (moreover) many [high] priests, 
because they were dying, and were not 
permitted to remain. 

*4 But because this (one) standeth for ever, his 
priesthood passeth not away. 

?5 And he is able to save for eternity them who 
approach by him unto Aloha; for he liveth 
through all time, and offereth up prayers on their 
behalf. 

6 Eor such an High Priest as this was adequate 
for us; pure, and without evil, and without spot; 
who was separate from sins, and exalted higher 
than heaven. 

?7 With him there was no necessity daily, like 
the chief of the priests, that first for his own sins 
he should offer sacrifices, and then on behalf of 
the people: for this [last] he did once when in 
himself he offered. 

?8 For the law constituted infirm men priests; but 
the word of the oath, which was subsequent to 


5€ Hebrews 7:22 - Arobo, Gr: egguos 


the law, (hath constituted) THE SON perfect for 
evermore. 


8:1 But the sum™” of them all (is)---We have a 
High Priest who hath sat down at the right hand 
of the throne of the Majesty in heaven; 

? and who hath become a Minister of the holy 
place, and of the true tabernacle, which Aloha 
hath framed, and not man. 

3 And every high priest is appointed*”’ to offer 
oblations and victims: hence it was right that this 
one should also have that which he might offer. 

But were he upon the earth, he would not be a 
priest, because there were priests who offered 
oblations as by the law; 

3 they, (namely,) who minister at™™ an emblem 
and shadow of those (things) that are in heaven. 
As it was said unto Musha when he made the 
tabernacle, See and make every thing according 
to the pattern which was showed to thee in the 
mountain. 

But now a ministry which is better than that 
hath Jeshu Meshiha received, by so much as 
that covenant of which he is made the 
Mediator®™ is better, and was given with better 
promises, than that. 

’ For if the first covenant had been faultless, no 
place had there been for this second. 
è For reprehending them he saith, Behold, the 
days are coming, saith the LORD, and | will 
complete with*® the family of the house of 
Israel, and with the family of the house of 
Jihuda, 
? THE NEW COVENANT: not as was that 
covenant which | gave to their fathers in the day 
that | took them by their hand, and led them from 
the land of Metsreen; because they did not 
persevere in my covenant, therefore | have 
neglected them, saith the Lorp. 
10 But this is the covenant that I will give to the 
family of the house of Israel after these days, 
saith the Lord: | will in-give my law in their 
minds, and upon their hearts will | inscribe it; 
and | will be to them, even I, Aloha, and they 
shall be unto me the people: 

and no man shall (have need to) teach the 
son of his city, nor his brother, and say, Know 
the Lord; because all shall know me, from the 
least of them to the eldest of them. 


563 


°°? Hebrews 8:1 - Risho, the chief 


Hebrews 8:3 - Or, standeth that he might offer 
Hebrews 8:5 - Or, unto an emblem and shadow 
Hebrews 8:6 - Metsoya 

Hebrews 8:8 - Upon 


562 
563 
564 
565 


12 And | will purify them from their 
unrighteousness, and their sins again will | not 
remember unto them. 

13 In that he said, THE NEW, he hath made the 
former old: and that which is antiquated, and 
hath grown old, is nigh unto decay. 


9:1 But in the first there were ordinances of 
ministry, and a worldly” sanctuary. 
? For in the first tabernacle that was made there 
were the candelabrum, and the table, and the 
presence bread”; and this was called the Holy 
place. 
3 But the interior tabernacle, that was within the 
second veil, was called the Holy of Holies: 

in it were the incense-vessel”” of gold, and 
the ark of the covenant, which was altogether 
covered with gold; and within it were the golden 
urn, in which was the manna, and the rod of 
Aharun that budded, and the tablets of the 
covenant: 

and above this the cherubim of glory 
overshadowing the mercy-seat. But time there is 
not to speak upon every one of these which 
were thus ordained. 

Now, into the outer sanctuary at all times 
entered the priests, and fulfilled their offices; 
7 but into the tabernacle which was within, one 
day in the year, alone, entered the high priest, 
with that blood which he offered for himself and 
the sins of the people. 
ê By this the Spirit of Holiness made known that 


the way of the holies®™® was not yet manifested, 


so long as™ was the standing of the first 
tabernacle. 
°? And this was a figurative representation®”' for 


the time in which oblations and victims have 
been offered;—those which have not been able 
to perfect the consciousness of him who offered 
them; 

1 but (have consisted) in meat and drink only, 
and in various kinds of baptism, being 
institutions of the flesh appointed until the time 
of setting right. 

1 But the Meshiha who hath come was a High 
Priest of good things which he wrought out, and 
hath entered into the great and perfect 


°°° Hebrews 9:1 - Olmonoyo, secular 


Hebrews 9:2 - Bread of faces 

Hebrews 9:4 - The house of perfumes 

Hebrews 9:8a - Urcho dakadishee 

Hebrews 9:8b - What time was the standing of 
the first, &c. 

57t Hebrews 9:9 - Or, parable 


567 
568 
569 
570 


tabernacle (which was) not made with hands, 
nor made from these creatures. 

12 Nor entered he with the blood of goats and 
calves, but with the blood of himself he entered 
once the holy place, and hath found eternal 
redemption. 

13 For if the blood of goats and of calves, and 
the dust of an heifer, sprinkled upon those who 
were unclean, sanctifieth them for the 
purification of their flesh, 

14 how much more then shall the blood of the 
Meshiha, who, by the Eternal Spirit, himself hath 
offered without spot unto Aloha, purify our 
conscience from dead works, to serve the Aloha 
the Living? 

° For this was he made the Mediator of the new 
covenant, that by his death he might become the 
ransom for those who had transgressed against 
the first covenant, (and) that they might receive 
the promise, they, who are called unto the 
inheritance which is eternal. 

For where a covenant?” is, there is indicated 
the DEATH of that which made it. 

For upon death only is it confirmed; because 
while he who made it lived there is no value in it. 

18 Wherefore neither the first without blood was 
confirmed. 

19 For when every precept had been enjoined 
by Musha to the whole people according to the 
law, Musha took the blood of the heifer, and 
water, with the scarlet wool, and hyssop, and 
sprinkled upon the books and upon all the 
people, 

20 and said to them, This is the blood of that 
covenant which is commanded by Aloha. 
=" Also upon the tabernacle and upon all the 
vessels of the service from it with blood he 
sprinkled. 

Because every thing with blood was purified 
under the law; and without shedding of blood 
there is no remission. 

?3 For it was necessary that these which are a 
type of the heavenlies, with (these) things 
should be purified; but the heavenlies 
themselves with sacrifices that are more 
excellent than they. 

For not into the sanctuary made with hands 
hath the Meshiha entered, which is an emblem 
of the true one, but into heaven itself hath he 
entered, that he might appear before the face of 
Aloha for us. 

*° Nor [was it needful] that he should offer 
himself many times, as did the chief of the 


72 Hebrews 9:16 - Diathike 


priests, entering every year into the holy place 
with blood not his own; 

8 otherwise he would have been obligated 
many times to suffer from the beginning of the 
world. But now, in the end of the world, once 
hath he offered himself, that by his sacrifice he 
might abolish sin. 

*7 And as it is ordained to the sons of men, that 
they must once die, and after their death the 
judgment; 

?8 so also the Meshiha was once offered, and in 
his (own) person sacrificed (for) the sins of 
many; but the second time®”? without sins he 
appeareth for the salvation of them who expect 
him. 


10:1 For there was in the law the shadow of 
good things to come, not the subsistence of the 
very things, therefore (though) every year the 
same sacrifices were offered they could never 
perfect those who offered them. 

? For if they had perfected, they would have 
ceased afterward from the presentation of them; 
because the conscience of those who had been 
once purified by them would not henceforth have 
been troubled by (such) sins. 

But in those sacrifices their sins are brought to 
remembrance every year. 

* For it is impossible for the blood of bulls and of 
goats to purify (from) sins. 

Wherefore when he cometh into the world he 
saith, Sacrifices and oblations thou hast not 
willed, but with a body hast thou clothed me: 

ê and entire burnt-offerings for sins thou hast 
not required. 

7 Then said |, Behold, | come; in the sum” of 
the books it is written concerning me, that | shall 
do thy will, Aloha. 

ê Above” he said, Victims, and oblations, and 
entire burnt-offerings for sin thou hast not willed; 
those which are offered in the law. 

* And afterwards he said, Behold, | come, that | 
may do thy will, Aloha. In this he hath done 
away with the first, that he may establish the 
second. 

10 For by this his will we are sanctified by the 
offering of the body of Jeshu Meshiha, which 
was once. 

For every high priest who stood and 
ministered every day, offered the same 
sacrifices, which can never purify (from) sins. 


574 


573 Hebrews 9:28 - Or, two times: tarteen zabneen 


Hebrews 10:7 - Or, head, chief 
Hebrews 10:8 - From above 


574 
575 


12 But this [High Priest] one sacrifice hath 

offered for sins, and hath sat down at the right 
hand of Aloha for ever: 

13 waiting from henceforth until his adversaries 
are set as a footstool beneath his feet. 

14 For by one offering he hath perfected those 
who are sanctified through him for ever. 

15 Now the witness unto us is the Spirit of 
Holiness, when he saith, 

16 This is the covenant that | will give to them 
from after those days, saith the Lorp: | will give 
my law in their minds, and upon their hearts will | 
inscribe it; 

7 and their iniquity and their sins | will not 
remember against them. 

18 BUT WHERE THERE IS REMISSION OF 
SINS, THERE IS NOT REQUIRED AN 
OFFERING FOR SINS. 

? We have, therefore, my brethren, 
confidence”? to enter?”” the holy place through 
the blood of Jeshu; 

and a way of life which he hath now made 
new to us through the veil, which is his flesh; 

and we have the High Priest over the house 
of God. 

?? Let us, therefore, draw near with a confirmed 
heart, and the full security of faith, with our 
hearts sprinkled and cleansed from an evil 
conscience, and our body washed with pure 
waters; 

?3 and let us persevere in the confession of our 
hope, and not swerve; for faithful is He who hath 
promised us. 

*4 And let us consider one another”? with 
incitement to charity and good works. 

*° And let us not forsake our congregation, as is 
the custom with some; but pray one with 
another; (and) so much the more as ye see that 
day to be approaching. 
°° Eor if with his will any man shall sin after he 
hath received the knowledge of the truth, there 
is not still a victim to be offered for sins; 

? but a fearful judgment to come, and burning 
fire which devoureth the adversaries. 

?8 Eor if he who transgressed the law of Musha, 
upon the mouth of two or three witnesses, 
without mercy died; 

how much greater punishment, think ye, shall 
he receive who hath trampled upon the Son of 
Aloha, and hath counted the blood of the 
covenant of him by which he had been sanctified 


°7° Hebrews 10:19a - Openness of faces 


Hebrews 10:19b - In the entrance of 
Hebrews 10:24 - One in the other 


577 
578 


as that of every man and hath insulted the Spirit 
of grace? 
°° We know him who hath said, Retribution is 
mine, and | will repay: and again, The Lorp shall 
judge his people. 
31 How terrible?” 
the Living! 
32 Be mindful, therefore, of the first days, those 
in which ye received baptism; and when ye 
sustained a great agony of sufferings, 
33 with ignominy and affliction; and when ye 
were made gazing-stocks, and were associated 
with men who also endured these (things). 
34 And it afflicted you on account of them who 
were bound; and the pillage of your goods with 
joy ye sustained, as knowing that ye have a 
possession in heaven, which is better, and 
passeth not away. 
3 Destroy not, therefore, the confidence which 
you have, for which there is a great reward. 

But patience is needed by you, that ye may 
do the will of Aloha, and receive the promise. 
3% Because (yet) a little time, and a very little, 
and He who cometh shall come, and not be 
slow. 
°° But the just by the faith of me shall live; but if 
he become weary, my soul delighteth not in 
him. 
°° But we are not of the weariness™' which 
bringeth®®* to perdition, but of the faith which 
maketh us to possess our soul. 


to fall into the hands of Aloha 


11:1 Now FAITH is the persuasion concerning 
things which are in hope, as if they were in 
reality’, and a revelation of those which are not 
seen. 

? And for this was the testimony concerning the 
elders. 

° For by faith we perceive that the worlds were 
ordained by the word of Aloha, and (how) these 
(things) which are seen were from those which 
are not seen. 

* By faith Habel offered a sacrifice which was 
far better than that of Koen unto Aloha; and 
because of it there is respecting him a testimony 
that he was righteous; and Aloha gave witness 
concerning his oblation; and on account thereof 
also while dead he is speaking. 


° Hebrews 10:31 - Or, that fear (how) great of 


falling, &c. 

58 Hebrews 10:38 - Or, be cut off 
Hebrews 10:39a - Or, the excision 
Hebrews 10:39b - Or, leadeth 
Hebrews 11:1 - In act 


581 
582 
583 


° Through faith Hanak was translated*™’, and 
did not taste death; nor was he found, because 
Aloha had translated him: for before that he 
would translate him, there was respecting him 
the testimony that he pleased Aloha. 

ê But without faith it is not possible for man to 
please Aloha; for he who draweth near unto 
Aloha must believe that he is, and that of those 
who seek him he will be the rewarder. 

’ By faith Nuch, when spoken with upon those 
things which had not been seen, feared, and 
made him the ark for the salvation of his 
family”®"; by which he condemned the world, and 
was an heir of the righteousness which is by 
faith. 

è By faith Abraham, when he was called, heard 
that he was to go forth to a place which he 
should receive for an inheritance; and he went 
out, while he knew not whither he was going. 

By faith he was a sojourner in the land that 
was promised to him, as in an alien state, and 
dwelt in tabernacles with Ishok and Jakub, sons 
of the inheritance which was his by the promise: 

for he was expecting the city which hath 
foundations, whose builder and maker is Aloha. 

"' By faith Saro, who was barren, received 
strength to conceive seed, and, which (thing) 
was not in the time of her years, gave birth (to a 
son); because she was sure that he who had 
promised to her was faithful. 

12 Therefore from one who had failed from old 
age, were there begotten multitudes as the stars 
of heaven, and as the sand upon the shores of 
the sea, which have no number. 

13 In faith died these all, not having gotten their 
promise, but from afar had beheld it, and exulted 
in it, and confessed that strangers they were, 
and sojourners in the earth. 

For they who these things say, make 
manifest that their city they are seeking. 

15 But if that city from which they had gone out 
they desired, they had opportunity to return and 
go to it. 

16 But now it is known that a better (one) than 
that they desired; that (namely) which is in 
heaven. Wherefore Aloha was not ashamed 
their God to be called; for he hath prepared for 
them a city. 

1” By faith Abraham offered Ishok in his 
temptation and his only-born he lifted upon the 
altar, even him whom he had received by the 
promise: 


584 Hebrews 11:5 - Or, changed 


58 Hebrews 11:7 - the sons of the house 


18 for it had been said to him, In Ishok shall be 
called to thee the seed. 
19 For he thought within himself, that Aloha 
could®®® even from the dead upraise [him]: and 
on account of this in a similitude he was given to 
him. 
*° By faith in that which was to come, Ishok 
blessed Jakub and Isu. 
?1 By faith, when dying, Jakub blessed each of 
the sons of Jauseph; and worshipped upon the 
head of his staff. 
?? By faith Jauseph, when dying, was mindful of 
the going forth of the sons of Israel°®’, and 
commanded concerning his bones. 
?3 By faith the parents of Musha concealed him 
when he had been born three months, because 
they saw that he was a beautiful child; and they 
feared not the edict of the king. 
?4 By faith Musha, when he became a man, 
refused to be called the son of the daughter of 
Pherun; 
*° and chose to himself to be in affliction with 
the people of Aloha, and not for a little time to 
delight (himself) in sin; 

and considered the riches of the reproach of 
Meshiha to be far greater than the treasures of 
Metsreen: for he contemplated the recompence 
of the reward. 
? By faith he forsook Metsreen, and feared not 
the wrath of the king; and hoped, as one who 
beheld Aloha who is the invisible. 
?8 By faith they performed the passover, and the 
sprinkling of the blood, that he might not come 
near,—he, who was destroying the first-born. 
*° By faith they traversed the sea of Sooph, as 
those who (march) upon dry land; but the 
Metsroyee were swallowed up in it, when they 
had dared to enter it. 
an By faith the ramparts of Jirichu fell down, after 
they had been encompassed seven days. 
31 By faith Rachob the harlot perished not with 
those who would not hearken, because she had 
received the explorers in peace. 
32 What shall | yet say? For (too) brief is the 
time for me to tell of Gedhun, and of Borok, and 
of Shemshun, and of Nephtoch, and of David, 
and of Shomuel, and of the rest of the prophets; 
33 they who through faith conquered kingdoms, 
and wrought righteousness, and received 
promises, and shut the mouths of lions, 


586 Hebrews 11:19 - Lit. that power was in the hand 


of Aloha to upraise 
587 Hebrews 11:22 - The B'nai-Isroel 


3% and quenched the powers of fire, and were 
delivered from the edge” of the sword, and 
were made strong from infirmities, and became 
valiant in battle, and overthrew the camps of the 
adversaries. 
°° And they gave unto women their sons by the 
resurrection of the dead; and others in torments 
died, nor hoped to be delivered, that the better 
resurrection they might have. 
°° But others went through mockings and 
scourgings; others unto chains and 
imprisonments were given up, 
37 others were stoned, others divided, others 
died by the edge of the sword, others wandered 
about clothed with skins of sheep and of goats, 
necessitous, afflicted, and driven out. 
38 Men, of whom the world was not worthy, 
became as wanderers in the desert, and in 
mountains, and in dens, and in caverns of the 
earth. 
°° And these all, of whom there hath been 
(such) a testimony concerning their faith, 
received not the promise; 

because Aloha had afore contemplated for 
our help, that without us they should not be 
made perfect. 


12:1 Wherefore we also, having all these 
witnesses, who as clouds encompass us, will set 
ourselves loose from every weight, and°®’ the 
sin which at all time is prepared for us, and with 
perseverance will we run this race?” which is 
appointed to us. 
* And let us look unto Jeshu, who hath become 
the chief and the perfecter of our faith; who, for 
the joy that was before him, endured the cross, 
and unto shame delivered himself, and at the 
right hand of the throne of Aloha hath sat down. 
? Consider, therefore, how much he endured 
from sinners who were adversaries to 
themselves, that ye weary not, nor fail in your 
souls. 
* Not yet have ye come unto blood in the 
conflict which is against sin. 
° And ye have forgotten the instruction of him 
who, as unto children, hath said to you, My son, 
contemn not the discipline of the Lorp, and let 
not thy soul fail when by him thou art corrected: 
for whom the Lorp loveth he chastiseth, and 
scourgeth those children in whom he taketh 
pleasure. 


588 Hebrews 11:34 - Mouth of the sword 


589 Hebrews 12:12 - Also 


5% Hebrews 12:1b - Agony 


’ Endure, therefore, correction, because Aloha 
acteth towards you as with children: for who is a 
son whom his father doth not correct? 

è And if ye be without the correction with which 
every one is corrected, ye are aliens, and not 
children. 

* And if (when) the fathers of the flesh have 
chastised us we have revered them, how much 
more are we bound to be subject to our spiritual 
fathers”, that we may live? 

10 For they, during a little time, as they willed, 
chastised us; but Aloha for our advantage, that 
we might partake of his holiness. 

' For all chastisement, in its time, is not 
considered as joy, but as grief; but, in the end, 
the fruit of peace and righteousness it giveth 
unto them who with it have been exercised. 

12 Wherefore your relaxed hands and your 
trembling knees make strong; 

and right ways make for your feet, that the 
member which is lame may not wander, but be 
healed. 

14 Follow after peace with every man, and after 
holiness, without which man our Lord seeth not. 
° And be aware lest any one be found among 
you failing of the grace of Aloha; or lest any root 
of bitternesses should put forth the flower and 

injure you, and many be contaminated: 

or lest there be found among you any 
fornicator, or dissolute, as Isu, who for one meal 
sold his birthright. 

’ For ye know, also, that afterward he desired 
to inherit the blessing, but was rejected; for 
place for repentance he found not, though with 
tears he sought it. 

è For ye have not drawn nigh to the burning 
fire, and to that which may be touched, neither 
to, darknesses, to mist, and to tempest, 

* nor to the voice of the trumpet, and the voice 
of words, which they who heard withdrew (from), 
that it might not be additionally spoken to them. 
20 For they could not endure that which was 
commanded. For if an animal should approach 
to the mountain, it was to be stoned: 

and so terrible was the sight, that Musha 
said, | fear and tremble 

But ye have come nigh unto the Mount of 
Ziun, and to the city of Aloha the Living, to the 
Urishlem which is in heaven, and to the 
congregation of myriads of angels, 

?3 and to the church of the firstborn (ones) who 
are written in heaven, and to Aloha the Judge of 


51 Hebrews 12:9 - Abothain ddruchotho, a very 


questionable reading 


all, and to the spirits of the just who are 
perfected, 

* and to Jeshu the Mediator of the new 
covenant, and to the sprinkling of his blood, 
which speaketh better [things] than that of 
Habel. 

? Beware, therefore, lest ye be averse from 
Him who hath spoken with you; for if they 
escaped not who were averse from one who 
spake with them on earth, how much less we, if 
we withdraw from one who hath spoken to us 
from heaven? 

2 Him whose voice moved the earth? But now 
hath he promised and said, Yet once [more] | 
will move not only earth, but also heaven. 

? But that which he hath said, ONCE, showeth 
the (final) changing of these which are moved, 
because they are made, that those may remain 
which are immutable. 

?8 Therefore because we have received the 
kingdom which is immoveable™”, let us hold the 
grace by which we may serve and please Aloha 
with reverence and with fear: 

*° for our God is a devouring fire. 


13: 1 Let the love of the brethren continue in you; 

* and kindness to strangers forget not; for in this 
some who were made worthy, while not 
perceiving 993 it, have received angels. 

° Remember those who are bound, as if with 
them ye were bound: be mindful of those who 
are afflicted, as men (should) who are clothed 
with flesh. 

“ Honourable is marriage among all, and their 
bed is undefiled; but whoremongers and 
adulterers Aloha judgeth. 

° Let not your mind love money; but let 
whatever ye have suffice you: for the Lord hath 
said, | will not. abandon thee, nor withhold from 
thee support”? 

ê And it is ours to say confidently, My Lord is my 
helper, I will not fear: what [can] a man do to 
me? 

7 Remember your leaders; those who have 
spoken to you the word of Aloha: reflect on the 
consummation of their course, and imitate their 
faith. 

8 Jeshu Meshiha is yesterday, and to-day, and 
for ever. 


52 Hebrews 12:28 - Not moved 


Hebrews 13:2 - Or, feeling it 
Hebrews 13:5 - Withhold from thee hands; that is, 
help, strength, &c. 


593 
594 


* Unto strange and variable doctrines be not led 
away; for it is good that with grace we confirm 
our hearts, and not by meats, because they 
have not been helped who have walked in them. 

1 But we have an altar of which it is not lawful 
for them to eat who minister in the tabernacle. 

" For those animals, whose blood the high 
priest took into the sanctuary for sins, had their 
flesh burned without the camp. 

12 On this account Jeshu, that he might sanctify 
his people by his blood, without the city suffered. 
13 Therefore let us also go forth unto him 
without the camp, being, clothed with his 
ignominy. 

For we have no city which is permanent here; 
but one that is to come we are expecting. 

15 By him®”, therefore, let us offer up at all time 
unto Aloha the sacrifices of praise, which are the 
fruits of the lips which give thanks to his name. 

And forget not compassion and 
communication to the poor: for with these 
sacrifices a man pleaseth Aloha. 

Be persuaded by your leaders, and obey 
them; for they watch for your souls as men who 
must render an account of you, that with joy they 
may do this, and not with groans; for that is not 
profitable for you. 

18 Pray for us; for we are confident we have a 
good conscience, that in all things we desire to 
act aright. 

19 And more especially | ask from you to do this, 
that | may be turned to you quickly. 
°° But the God of peace, who brought up from 
the house of the dead the great Shepherd of the 
flock, by the blood of the eternal covenant, who 
is Jeshu Meshiha, our Lord, 

?1 make you perfect in every good work, that ye 
may do his will, and effect in you whatever is 
good before him, by Jeshu Meshiha: to him be 
glory unto the age of ages. Amen. 

? Now | request from you, my brethren, that ye 
prolong your minds on the word of exhortation; 
for in a few (words) | have written to you. 

But know that our brother Timotheos is 
released; and if he come soon, with him | will 
see you. 

4 Ask for the peace of all your leaders, and of 
all the saints: they of Italia ask for your peace. 

Grace be with you all. Amen. 


°° Hebrews 13:15 - By his hand 


The Epistle of Jakub The Apostle 


1:1 Jakub, a servant of Aloha and of our Lord 
Jeshu Meshiha, unto the twelve tribes who are 
dispersed among the nations: Peace. 
? All joy shall be to you, my brethren, when you 
shall have entered into temptations many and 
various. 

For you know that the proving of faith maketh 
you to possess patience; 
* but to patience let there be a perfect work, that 
you may be complete and perfected, and in 
nothing be deficient. 
° If any of you be deficient in wisdom, let him 
ask of Aloha, who giveth to all expansively, and 
upbraideth not, and it is given to him. 
ê But let him ask in faith, not wavering?”’. For he 
who wavereth is like the waves of the sea which 
the wind disturbeth. 
7 And let not that man expect to receive any 
thing from the Lorp, 
8 who is divided in his mind, and disturbed in all 
his ways. 
* But let the humble brother glory in his 
exaltation, 
10 and the rich in his humility; for as the flower of 
an herb, so he passeth. 

For the sun ariseth in his heat, and drieth the 
herb, and the flower of it falleth, and the beauty 
of its appearance perisheth; so also the rich 
withereth in his reverses. 

1? Blessed the man who endureth temptations: 
for when he hath been proved he shall receive 
the crown of life, which Aloha hath promised 
unto them who love him. 

13 Let no man say, when he is tempted, From 
Aloha | am tempted; for Aloha is not tempted 
with evils, and he no man tempteth. 

14 But each man from his concupiscence 
tempteth himself, and desireth, and is drawn 
away. 

15 And this desire conceiveth and beareth sin; 
and sin, when it is perfected, beareth death. 

'© Do not err, my beloved brethren; 

17 every good gift and perfect from above 
descendeth, from the Father of lights, with whom 
is no alteration, nor the shadow of vicissitude. 
18 He willed, and begat us by the word of truth, 
that we might be the first-ones of his creatures. 
19 And you, my beloved brethren, let every one 
of you be swift to hear, and slow to speak, and 
slow to be angry; 


5% James 1:6 - Or, not being divided 


20 for the wrath of man the righteousness of 
Aloha worketh not. 

Wherefore, remove from you all impurity and 
the abounding of wickedness, and with 
meekness receive the word which is engrafted in 
our nature, which is able to save your souls. 

?? But be doers of the word, and not hearers 
only, neither deceive yourselves. 

?3 For if a man be a hearer of the word and not 
a doer of it, this (man) is like one who vieweth 
his face in a mirror; 

*4 for he seeth himself and passeth, and hath 
forgotten what (manner of person) he was. 

*° But every one who looketh into the perfect 
law of liberty, and continueth therein, he is not a 
hearer of the hearing of forgetfulness, but a doer 
of works; and this shall be blessed in his work. 
*° And if a man thinketh that he serveth 
Aloha®’’, and holdeth not his tongue, but 
deceiveth his own heart, of this man his service 
is vain. 

? For the service”? which is pure and true 
before Aloha the Father, is this, to visit the 
orphans and widows in their afflictions, and that 
a man keep himself from the world without 
blemish. 


2:1 My brethren, do not hold with acceptance of 
faces the faith of the glory of our Lord Jeshu 
Meshiha. 

* For if there come into your congregation a 
man who hath rings of gold or beautiful 
vestments, and there come in a poor man in 
sordid vestments, 

3 and you look upon him who clothed in 
beautiful vestments, and say to him, Sit is here 
well; and you say to the poor man, Stand thou 
there, or, Sit thou here before the stool of our 
feet; 

“behold, are you not divided in yourselves, and 
become separaters for evil reasons? 

° Listen, my beloved brethren: Hath not Aloha 
chosen the poor of the world, but rich in faith, to 
be heirs in that kingdom which Aloha hath 
promised to them who love him? 

ê But you have despised the poor. Behold, are 
not the rich uprisen against you? And do they 
not drag you to the house of judgment? 


°97 James 1:26 - Or, ministereth unto Aloha 


538 James 1:27 - Teshmeshtho, ministry 


7 Do they not blaspheme against that Good 
Name which is pronounced upon you? 

è And if the law of Aloha in this you accomplish, 
as it is written, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as 
thyself, you do well; 

? but if you accept persons, you commit sin, and 
are convicted by the law as transgressors 
against the law. 

19 For he who keepeth the whole law, and in 
one offendeth, of the whole LAW he is guilty. 

" For he who hath said, Thou shalt not commit 
adultery, is he who hath said, Thou shalt not 
steal; but if thou do not commit adultery, yet 
steal, thou hast become a transgressor against 
the LAW. 

12 So speak and so act, as those who by the law 
of liberty are to be judged. 

13 For judgment is to be without mercy, upon 
him who hath not done mercy. Be you exalted 
by mercy over judgment. 

What is the use”, my brethren, if a man say, 
| have faith,---and works he hath not? How can 
his faith save him? 

' And, if a brother or sister be naked, and 
wanting the food of to-day, 

and any one of you shall say to them, Go in 
peace, be warm, and be satisfied, and give them 
not what is necessary for the body, what (would 
be) the use? 

17 Thus also the faith that hath not works is 
dead, (being) alone. 

For aman saith, Thou hast faith, and | have 
works; show me thy faith without thy works, and 
| will show thee my faith from my works. 

19 Thou believest that Aloha is one: thou doest 
well; the demons also believe and tremble. 

*° Art thou willing to know, O weak man, that 
faith without works is dead? 

=" Our father Abraham, was he not by works 
justified, when he offered Ishok his son on the 
altar? 

” Thou seest that his faith was helpful®°° unto 
his works; and by works his faith was perfected, 
and the scripture was accomplished which 
said, that Abraham believed in Aloha, and it was 

reckoned unto him for righteousness, and the 
friend of Aloha he was called. 

4 Thou seest that by works man is justified, and 
not by faith alone. 

?5 So also Rachab the harlot, was she not by 
works justified when she received the spies, and 
by another way sent them forth? 


| 600 


599 James 2:14 - Henyono, utilitas 


6 James 2:22 - Vide CASTELL'S Hept. Lex. in - 


*® Thus, as the body without the spirit is dead, 
so also the faith which is without works is dead. 


3:1 Let there not be many teachers among you, 
my brethren, but know that a greater 
condemnation we incur. 

? For (in) many we all offend. Every one who in 
word offendeth not, this is a perfect man, who is 
able to make subject also all his body. 

° For, behold, bridles into the mouth of horses 
we throw that we may make them submissive to 
us, and their whole body we turn. 

Also the mighty ships, while the furious winds 
drive them, by a little wood are turned about to 
the region which the will of him who guideth doth 
contemplate. 

° So also the tongue is a small member, and 
uplifteth itself. A little fire also burneth many 
forests;°"' 

ê and the tongue is a fire, a world of sin, like a 
forest is the tongue itself among our members; it 
defileth all of our body, and burneth the course 
of our generations which run (forward) as a 
wheel, and kindleth also itself with fire. 

For every nature of animals, and of birds, and 
reptiles of the sea, and of the dry land, have 
been subjected to the human nature; 

è but the tongue no one can subdue; this is an 
evil not ordered, (and) full of the poison of death. 
? For by it we bless the Lorp and the Father, 
and by it we curse men who in the likeness of 
Aloha were made; 

10 and from the same mouth go forth curses and 
blessings. My brethren, it is not fit that these 
should so be done. 

" Can it be that one fountain shall send forth 
waters sweet and bitter? 

12 Or can the fig-tree, my brethren, make olives, 
or the vines figs? thus also® salt waters cannot 
be made sweet. 

13 Who of you is wise and instructed? let him 
show his works in good conversations in meek 
wisdom. 

14 But if you have bitter envy among yourselves, 
or contention be in your hearts, be not inflated 
against the truth, nor lie; 

1 because this wisdom from above descendeth 
not; but is earthly, from the reasonings of the 
soul, and from demons. 

ê For where there are envy and contention, 
there also are tumult and every thing that is evil. 
17 But the wisdom that is from above is pure, 
and full of peace, and meekness, and 


6° James 3:5 - Obee sagiyee mauqdo 


6° Jsmes 3:12 - Hocano oph 


obedience, and full of mercies and good fruits, 
and is without division, and faces accepteth not. 
18 But the fruits of righteousness in quietness 
are sown by them who make peace. 


4:1 From whence are there among you wars 
and strifes? Is it not from the lusts which war in 
your members? 
? You desire, and have not; you kill and are 
emulous, yet it cometh not into your hands; you 
strive and make wars, and nothing have 
because you do not ask; 
: you ask and receive not, because you ask 
wickedly, as that you may cherish your lusts. 

Adulterers, know you not that the friendship of 
this world is enmity with Aloha? He, therefore, 
who willeth to be the friend of this world, hath 
become the enemy of Aloha. 
° Or do you vainly think that the scripture saith, 
that In emulation desireth the Spirit who dwelleth 
in us? 
ê But more excellent grace hath our Lord given 
unto us. Wherefore he saith, Aloha humbleth the 
proud, and to the humble he giveth grace. 

Be subject, therefore, unto Aloha; withstand 
Satana, and he will flee from you; 

and draw nigh unto Aloha, and he will be nigh 
you. Purify your hands, sinners, and sanctify 
your hearts, divided of soul. 
* Be humbled and sorrowful, and let your 
laughter be turned into grief, and your gladness 
into anxiety. 
1 Be humbled before the Lorb, and he will exalt 
you. 
" Speak not against one another, my brethren; 
for he who speaketh against his brother, or 
judgeth his brother, speaketh against the law, 
and judgeth the law. And if the law thou judgest, 
thou art not a doer of the law, but the judge of it. 
12 For one is the appointer®” of the law and the 
Judge, who can save and destroy. But thou, who 
art thou, who judgest thy neighbour? 
13 But what shall we say of them who say, To- 
day or tomorrow we will go to this city, or that, 
and work there one year, and negotiate, and 
make gain? 
14 and they know not what shall be on the 
morrow: for what is our life, but a vapour which 
for a little while is seen, and vanisheth and 
endeth? 
13 For instead they should say, If the Lorp will, 
and we live, we will do this or that. 
1$ They glory in their pride. All glorying such as 
this is from the Evil. 


603 
James 4:12 - Soem-nomoso 


17 And he who knoweth the good and doeth it 
not, sin is to him. 


5:1 O rich men, howl and weep for the miseries 
which are coming upon you. 

? Your riches are corrupt and stink, and your 
vestments are eaten of the moth, 

5 and your gold and your silver rusteth, and the 
rust of them is for a witness against you, and is 
to eat your flesh. You have gathered fire for you 
for the last days! 

* Lo, the hire of the labourers who have reaped 
your lands, which you have refused, clamoureth, 
and the cry of the harvests to the ears of the 
Lorp of Sabaoth hath ascended. 

° For you have lived daintily on the earth, and 
have been wanton, and have nourished your 
bodies, as for the day of slaughter. 

ê You have condemned and have killed the just, 
and he hath not resisted you. 

’ But you, my brethren, prolong your spirit until 
the coming of the Lorp; as the husbandman 
who expecteth the precious fruits of his lands, 
and prolongeth his spirit for them, until he 
receive the rain the early and the latter; 

so also you, prolong your spirit, and your 
hearts confirm; for the coming of our Lord 
draweth nigh. 

? Groan®™ not one against another, my 
brethren, that you be not judged; for, behold, the 
Judge standeth before the door. 

1° The example of the prophets take to you, my 
brethren, to prolong your spirits in your 
afflictions, them who have spoken in the name 
of the LoRD. 

" For, behold, we give blessedness to them 
who have endured. You have heard of the 
patience of lob, and the end which the Lorp 
wrought for him you have seen; because that 
merciful is the LoRD and compassionate. 

But before every thing, my brethren, swear 
not; by heaven nor by earth, nor with any other 
oath; but let your word be Yes, yes, and No, no, 
that you be not bound under condemnation. 

And if any of you be in affliction, let him pray; 
and if he rejoice, let him sing; 

14 and if he be sick, let him call for the 
presbyters of the church, and they will pray over 
him and anoint him with oil in the name of our 
Lord. 

15 And the prayer of faith shall make whole him 
who was sick, and our Lord shall raise him up; 
and if he have committed sins, they shall be 
forgiven him. 


604 James 5:9 - Lo tetanchun 


1ê But confess your faults one to another, and 
pray one for another, that you may be healed. 
For great is the power of that prayer which the 
righteous prayeth. 

1 Elia also was a man of suffering, as we; and 
he prayed that the rain should not fall upon the 
earth, and it fell not (for) three years and six 
months. 

18 And again he prayed, and the heaven gave 
rain, and the earth gave her fruits. 

19 My brethren, if any of you shall err from the 
way of truth, and one shall convert him from his 
error, 

2 let him know, that he who turneth a sinner 
from the error of his way, saveth his soul from 
death, and hideth the multitude of his sins. 


The Epistle of Petros 


1:1 Petros, an apostle of Jeshu Meshiha, to the 
chosen-ones and sojourners who are scattered 
in Pontos and in Galatia, and in Kapadukia, and 
in Asia, and in Bithunia: 
? them who are elected by the foreknowledge of 
Aloha the Father, through sanctification of the 
Spirit, that they might be unto obedience, and 
unto the sprinkling of the blood of Jeshu 
Meshiha: grace and peace be multiplied with 
you. 
? Blessed be Aloha, the Father of our Lord 
Jeshu Meshiha, who by his abundant grace hath 
begotten us anew through the resurrection of 
our Lord Jeshu Meshiha unto the hope of 
salvation, 
* and to the inheritance which is not corruptible, 
and not defiled, and not to be consumed, which 
is prepared for you in heaven, 
° while you are kept by the power of Aloha and 
through faith, unto the salvation which is 
prepared to be revealed in the last times; 
ê wherein you will rejoice for ever, though in this 
little time you are afflicted®” by manifold 
temptations which pass over you; 
that the proof of your faith may be seen, which 
is more precious than gold refined which is 
proved in fire, unto praise and unto honour and 
unto glory, at the revelation of Jeshu Meshiha; 
whom you have not seen and (yet) love, and 
in whose faith you exult with glorious joy that is 
not spoken: 
* that you may receive the recompence of your 
faith, the salvation of your souls. 
10 That salvation which the prophets 
investigated when they prophesied concerning 
the grace which was to be given unto you, 
" and searched into, what time the Spirit of the 
Meshiha who dwelt in them showed and testified 
of the future sufferings of the Meshiha, and his 
glory which (should be) after them. 
'? And all that they searched was revealed to 
them; for not for themselves they inquired, but to 
us (and) of us°” they prophesied those 
(blessings) which now are revealed to you by 
them who have preached to you” by the Spirit 
of Holiness which is sent from heaven. 
13 Wherefore gird up the loins of your minds, 
and be fully wakeful, and hope for the joy that 


605 1 Peter 1:6 - Or, straitened 


1 Peter 1:12a - Lan dilan 
1 Peter 1:12b - Or, evangelized you 


606 
607 


cometh to you at the revelation of our Lord 
Jeshu Meshiha; 

14 as obedient children, and not partaking again 
of the former desires which you desired when 
ignorant. 

° But be holy in all your conversations, as he is 
holy who calleth you; 

because it is written, Be ye holy, as | also am 
holy. 

17 And if you call him Father before whom there 
is no respect of persons, and who judgeth every 
man according to his works, with fear conduct 
you in this time of your sojourn; 

18 while you know that not with silver which 
wasteth away, nor with gold, you have been 
redeemed from your vain works which you 
received from your fathers, 

19 but with the precious blood of the Lamb 
spotless and unblemished, who is the Meshiha; 

° who was afore-separated for this from before 
the foundations of the world, and hath been 
manifested in these last times for you, 

?1 who by him®”® believe in Aloha, who raised 
him from the dead, and gave him glory, that your 
faith and your hope may be in Aloha. 

Let your souls be sanctified in obedience to 
the truth, and be filled with the charity which 
respecteth not persons, that with a pure heart 
and perfect you may love one another, 

as men who are regenerated, not by a 
perishable seed, but by that which is 
imperishable, by the living word of Aloha which 
abideth for ever. 

** Because all flesh is grass, and all its beauty 
as the flower of the field. The grass withereth 
and the flower drieth up, 

*° but the word of our God abideth for ever; and 
this is that word which is preached unto you. 


2:1 Make to cease therefore from you all malice 
and all guile, and dissimulation, and envy, and 
slander; 

* and be as (new)-born babes, and be desirous 
of the word as of milk pure and spiritual, that by 
it you may increase unto life. 

3 If you have tasted and seen how good is the 
LORD, 

“ unto whom you have come, who is the living 
stone whom men have rejected, yet (who is) 
chosen and honourable with Aloha. 


608 1 Peter 1:21 - Dabideh 


° And you also as living stones are builded, and 
become a Spiritual temple, and holy priests to 
offer sacrifices, which are acceptable before 
Aloha by Jeshu Meshiha. 

ê For it is said in the scripture, Behold, | lay in 
Zion a stone choice®® and honourable in the 
head of the corner: whosoever believeth in him 
shall not be ashamed. 

7 To you therefore is given this honour, to them 
who believe: but to them who are disobedient he 
is a rock®"° of offence, or a stone®”’ of stumbling, 

8 and they are offended at him in not obeying 
the word, because to this they are set. 

* But you are a chosen race, who minister as 
priests to the kingdom® e12 ak holy people, a 
congregation redeemed to announce the praises 
of him who hath called you from darkness to his 
transcendant light: 

° those who before were not reputed a people, 
but now the people of Aloha; upon whom also 
mercies were not; but now, mercies are poured 
upon you. 

1 My beloved, | beseech you as strangers and 
as sojourners, be separate from all the lusts of 
the body which make wars against the soul. 

And let your conversation be good before all 
men; and they who speak against you malicious 
words shall see your good deeds, and shall 
glorify Aloha in the day of the probation. 

3 And be subject to all men for the sake of 
Aloha: to kings, on account of their authority; 

* and to judges, because from him they are 
sent for the punishment of transgressors, and for 
the commendation of good works. 

13 For so is the will of Aloha, that by your 
comely works you may shut the mouth of fools 
who know not Aloha. 

1€ As the sons of liberty, yet not as men who 
make their liberty a veil for their wickedness, but 
as the servants of Aloha. 

17 Honour all; your brethren love; and Aloha 
revere; and kings honour. 

18 And those servants who are among you, be 
subject to your masters with reverence; not only 
to the good and gentle, but also to the hard and 
the severe. 

For these are pleasing before Aloha, who, for 
the sake of a good conscience, endure the 
afflictions that come upon them unjustly. 


609 1 Peter 2:6 - Or, tried, bachirtho 


1 Peter 2:7a - Kipha 
1 Peter 2:7b - Abn'na 
1 Peter 2:9 - Damkahno lemalkutho 


610 
611 
612 


2 For they who on account of their offences 
suffer tribulations, what praise have they? But 
when you do well and they afflict you, and you 
endure, then doth your praise become great with 
Aloha. 

*1 For unto this have you been called; because 
the Meshiha also hath died for us, and left us 
this example, that in his steps we may walk. 

22 Who did no sin, nor was guile found in his 
mouth; 

?3 who was reviled and reviled not, and suffered 
and threatened not, but delivered his cause to 
the Judge of righteousness; 

** and took all our sins and upbore®’’ them in 
his body on the cross; that when dead to sin, in 
the righteousness of him we might live; for by his 
stripes you are healed, 

° who had wandered as sheep, and are 
returned now unto the Shepherd and 
Guardian®" of your souls. 


613 


3:1 So you also, wives, be subject to your own 
husbands, that them who have not obeyed the 
word, by your comely manners without labour 
you may win, 

* while they see that with reverence and with 
chastity you conduct yourselves. 

3 Neither be adorned with outward adornings of 
the entwinement of your hair, or necklaces of 
gold, or of excelling vestments, 

* but adorn yourselves in the hidden man of the 
heart, with the spirit of gentleness which 
perisheth not, the ornament of excellence before 
Aloha. 

° For so also of old the holy women who 
confided in Aloha adorned themselves, and 
were subject to their husbands, 

ê even as Sara was subject to Abraham, and 
called him My Lord: of her be you the daughters 
in good works, not being perturbed by any fear. 

7 And you, men, dwell likewise with your wives 
with knowledge, and as feeble vessels in honour 
hold them; for they also with you inherit the gift 
of the life of eternity; that you be not hindered in 
your prayers. 

ê But, finally be all unanimous, and suffer with 
those who suffer, and love one another, and be 
merciful and gentle; 

and let no man render evil for evil, nor 
invective for invective, but, that which is contrary 
to them, bless: for unto this are you called, that 
the blessing you may inherit. 

613 4 Peter 2:24 - Vaseq enun. Aphel of nesaq, 
ascendit, clevarit 
614 1 Peter 2:25 - Sou ro, curator 


10 Who then willeth life, And loveth good days to 
see? Let him keep his tongue from evil, And his 
lips that they speak not guile. 
1 Let him depart from evil and do good, And 

seek peace and run after it. 
12 For the eyes of the Lor are upon the 
righteous, And his ears, to hear them; And the 
face of the Lord is against the wicked. 
13 And who (is he) who will do you evil if you be 
emulous of good?” (actions)? 
14 And (yet) if you suffer for the sake of 
righteousness, you are happy. And you will not 
fear them who would make you afraid, nor be 
shaken. 
15 But sanctify in your hearts the Lord Meshiha. 
And be prepared to make defence to every one 
who shall seek of you speech concerning the 
hope of the faith, with meekness and with 
seriousness, 

while you have a good conscience; that as 
they speak against you as against evil men, they 
may be made ashamed who have traduced your 
good conversations in the Meshiha. 
17 For it helpeth you (if) while doing goodly 
works you have to sustain evil, if so it be the will 
of Aloha, and not while working evils. 
18 Because the Meshiha also once died on 
account of sins, the just on account of sinners, 
that he might bringê'® us unto Aloha. And dead 
in the body and alive in the Spirit, 
19 he preached unto those souls who were held 
in sheul, 
*° those who before were disobedient in the 
days of Nuch®"’; while the long-suffering of 
Aloha commanded that he should make the ark, 
upon the hope of their conversion, and eight 
souls only entered therein, and were saved in 
the waters. 
7" After which very type also you are saved in 
baptism®'®, not while you cleanse the body from 
filth, but while you make confession of°'? Aloha 
with a pure conscience, and of the resurrection 
of Jeshu Meshiha; 

who is exalted unto heaven, and is at the 
right hand of Aloha, and unto whom are subject 
angels and authorities and powers. 


615 4 Peter 3:13 - Plural 


1 Peter 3:18 - Or, present 

1 Peter 3:20 - Or, Nooch 

1 Peter 3:21a - B'mahmuditho 

1 Peter 3:21b — Or, in Aloha, and in the 
ressurection 


616 
617 
618 
619 


4:1 If then the Meshiha hath suffered for you in 
the flesh, be you also armed in it with the same 
mind; for every one who dieth in his body hath 
ceased from all sins, 

* that henceforth to the lusts of men he should 
not live, what time he is in the body, but to the 
will of Aloha. 

3 For the time which hath passed sufficeth to 
have served the will of the Gentiles in 
indulgence, in drunkenness, in vileness, in 
revellings, and in the service of demons. 

* And, behold, now they wonder and blaspheme 
at you because you riot not with them in that 
former indulgence; 

° they who shall give account to Aloha, who will 
judge the dead and the living. 

ê For on this account the dead also have been 
evangelized; that they might be judged as men 
in the flesh, and live with Aloha in the Spirit. 

But the end of all cometh; therefore be sober, 
and watch unto prayer. 

And before every thing have ardent love for 
one another; for love covereth a multitude of 
sins. 

? And be lovers of guests without murmuring. 

° And every man of you the gift which he hath 
received from Aloha, let him minister thereof 
unto his neighbours as good stewards of the 
various grace of Aloha. 

" Whoever shall speak, as the word of Aloha let 
him speak; and whoever ministereth, (he shall 
minister) as from the power which Aloha giveth 
to him, that in every thing which you do Aloha 
may be glorified through Jeshu Meshiha, whose 
are the glory and honour to the age of ages. 
Amen. 

12 My beloved, be not amazed at the 
temptations which you have, as that something 
strange happeneth to you, because for your 
probation they have been; 

3 but rejoice that you are partakers of the 
sufferings of the Meshiha, that so also at the 
revelation of his glory you may rejoice and exult. 

And if you be reviled for the sake of the name 
of the Meshiha, you are happy; for the Spirit of 
the glory of Aloha resteth upon you. 

Only, let no man of you suffer as a murderer, 
or as a thief, or as a doer of evils. 

16 But if he suffer as a Christian, let him not be 
ashamed, but let him glorify Aloha in that very 
name. 

17 For the time is, that judgment shall begin from 
the house of Aloha. But if from us it begin, what 
is the end (to be) of them who obey not the 
gospel of Aloha? 


18 And if the righteous scarcely be saved, the 
wicked and the sinner where shall he be found? 
19 Wherefore, let them who suffer according to 
the will of Aloha commend to him their souls in 

good works, as unto the Faithful Creator. 


5:1 But | entreat of the presbyters who are 
among you, I, a presbyter, your companion, and 
a witness of the sufferings of the Meshiha, and a 
partaker of his glory that is to be revealed; 

? feed the flock of Aloha which is delivered to 
you, and take care (of it) spiritually”, not by 
constraint, but with the will; not for corrupt gain, 
but with all your heart; 

3 not as lords of the flock, but that you may be 
to them a goodly example; 

“ that when the Chief of pastors™" shall be 
revealed, you may receive from him a crown of 
glory which fadeth not. 

And you younger, be subject to your 
presbyters, and be clothed carefully? with 
humility of mind towards one another; because 
Aloha is against those who exalt themselves, 
and to the humble he giveth grace. 

ê Be humbled, therefore, under the mighty hand 
of Aloha, that he may exalt you at the right time. 
7 And all your anxiety cast upon Aloha, because 
he is careful over you. 

è Watch, and be mindful, because your 
adversary Satana, as a lion, roareth and walketh 
and seeketh whom he may devour. 

* Withstand him then, being confirmed in the 
faith; and know that upon your brethren also 
who are in the world, these same sufferings 
come. 

'° But the God of grace, who hath called us to 
his eternal glory by Jeshu Meshiha, will give to 
us while we endure these few afflictions to be 
strengthened, and confirmed, and established in 
him for ever. 

" To Him be glory and dominion and honour 
unto the age of ages. Amen. 

12 These few, as I consider, | have written to 
you by the hands of Silvanos, a faithful brother; 
and | persuade and testify, that this is the true 
grace of Aloha, this wherein you stand. 

3 The elect church which is in Babel, asketh for 
your peace, and Markos my son. 

Salute one another with the holy kiss. Peace 

be with all of you who are in the Meshiha. Amen. 


€20 1 Peter 5:2 - Vasuru ruchonoith 


1 Peter 5:4 - Rab Roauth6o 
1 Peter 5:5 - Or, closely 


621 
622 


The Second Epistle of Petros 


1:1 Shemun Petros, a servant of Jeshu 
Meshiha, to those who by faith the same in 
preciousness®” with us have been made equal, 
through the righteousness of our Lord and our 
Redeemer Jeshu Meshiha. 

Grace and peace be multiplied to you through 
the knowledge of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha. 

? As He who all (things) which of the divine 
power are unto life and godliness*™ hath given 
(us), through the knowledge of Him who hath 
called us unto the glory of him and of virtue®”, 

* by annunciations?”® great and precious which 
he hath given to you, that by them you may be 
partakers of the divine nature, while you escape 
the corruption of the lusts which are in the world; 

° So, with this, bringing in all diligence®”’, add to 
your faith virtue; but to virtue knowledge, 

ê but to knowledge perseverance, but to 
perseverance patience, but to patience 
godliness, 

but to godliness brotherly kindness, but to 
brotherly kindness love. 

è For while these are found with you, and 
abound, neither slothfulness nor unfruitfulness 
will stand against you in the knowledge of our 
Lord Jeshu Meshiha. 

* For he with whom these are not found is blind, 
and seeth not, and hath forgotten the purification 
of his former sins. 

'° Upon this the more, my brethren, be careful, 
that by your good works your calling and your 
election you may confirm®”: for, while you do 
these, you will never lapse”; 

" for so abundantly shall be given to you the 
entrance of the eternal kingdom of our Lord and 
our Saviour Jeshu Meshiha. 

12? Wherefore it doth not weary me to remind you 
constantly of these, that you may know well, and 
be established upon this truth. 


€23 2 Peter 1:1 and 1:6 - Or, honour 


2 Peter 1:3a - Dechalath Aloha, the fear, 
reverence, or worship of Aloha 

625 2 Peter1:3b - Or, excellence. B'teshbuchtho dileh 
va-damyathrutho 

€26 2 Peter 1:4 - Nunciatio, promissum: from, to 
know, make known 

€27 9 Peter 1:5 - Or, gravity. Shekoltano 

2 Peter 1:10a - Or, make sure 

2 Peter 1:10b - Meshtarin, from shara, lapsus est, 
deliquit, transgressus est 


624 


628 
629 


13 But | consider it right, so long as | am in this 
body”, to stir you up in remembrance: 

1 knowing that the decease of my body is 
shortly (to be,) as also our Lord Jeshu Meshiha 
hath made me know. 

15 But be careful also that (these) you may 
continually have; that also after my going forth 
the memorial of them you may observe. 

16 For it is not after fables which are made with 
art that we have gone, in making known to you 
the power and coming of our Lord Jeshu 
Meshiha, but as we were spectators of his 
majesty. 

17 For when he received from Aloha the Father 
honour and glory, while a voice came to him as 
this, after the glorious beauty of his majesty, 
This is my Son, the Beloved, in whom | have 
delighted; 

® we also this voice heard from heaven, as it 
came to him when we were with him in the holy 
mount. 

19 We have that which is sure also, the word of 
prophecy; that into which you do well to look, as 
to a light shining in a dark place, until the day 
dawn, and the sun arise in your hearts. 

20 While this first you know, that every prophecy 
of the scripture its own solution?" is not. 

" For not by the will of man came any 
prophecy, but while by the Holy Spirit led spake 
the holy men of God. 


2:1 But there were false prophets in the world, 
as also among you there will be false teachers, 
they who introduce heresies of destruction®”, 
and, the Lord who bought them denying, bring 
upon themselves swift destruction. 

* And many will go after their wickedness; they, 
on account of whom the way of truth will be 
blasphemed. 

3 And with fraudulency®”? of deceptive words will 
they make merchandise of you; they, whose 
judgment (denounced) before tarrieth not, and 
whose destruction doth not sleep. 


633 


630 2 Peter 1:13 - Bephagro hono 


2 Peter 1:20 - Or, every prophecy the solution of 
its scripture is not. Cul nebiutho shorio dacthobo 
diloh lo hovo 

€32 2 Peter 2:1 - Abadono 

2 Peter 2:3 - Olubutho is used both for avaritia 
and defraudatio 


631 


633 


“ For if Aloha upon the angels who sinned was 
not lenient, but in chains of darkness shut them 
in the deeps, and delivered them to be kept to 
the judgment of pain; 

° and on the former world was not lenient, but 
Nuch, who was the eighth preacher of 
righteousness, he preserved, when the deluge 
came upon the world of the wicked; 

ê the cities of Sadum and of Omuro he burned, 
and with overthrow condemned them, while an 
example to the wicked who should be he set 
them; 

7 also Lut the righteous, who was bruised with 
the impure conversation of the lawless, he 
delivered; 

8 -for in sight and in hearing, while (that) just 
(man) dwelt among them, from day to day, his 
righteous soul by their lawless works was 
tortured; 

—the Lord knoweth how to deliver from 
affliction them who fear him, but the evil unto the 
day of judgment to be tormented will he reserve. 

10 But most those who after the flesh follow the 
concupiscence of impurity, and of authority are 
contemptuous; daring and arrogant, (and) who 
by greatness®** are not moved while they 
blaspheme: 
11 whereas angels, who in power and strength 
are (so much) greater than they, bring not 
against them a judgment of blasphemy®®”. 
1? But these, as the dumb animals, by nature 
(ordained) to the knife and to destruction, 
blaspheming what they know not, in their own 
destruction will be destroyed; 
13 while they in whom is iniquity the wages of 
iniquity shall receive. They repute as pleasure 
the luxury which is in the day. Blemishes (are 
they), full of spots, who delighting in their 
refreshments are luxurious: 
14 having eyes full of adultery, and sins which 
cease not, alluring souls that are not 
established. An heart have they which is 
disciplined in covetousness; sons of malediction, 
who, forsaking the straight way, have erred, 
and gone in the way of Belam bar Beur, who the 
wages of iniquity loved. 
1ê But he had reproof of his transgression; (for) 
the dumb ass which spake with the voice of man 
rebuked the madness of the prophet. 
These are wells without water, clouds driven 
from above, unto whom the blackness of 
darkness is reserved. 


634 2 Peter 2:10 - Or, glory, majesty 


°° 2 Peter 2:11 — Some mss add “from the LORD” 


18 Eor while they speak scoffing words of vanity, 
they allure with impure desires of the flesh those 
who almost escaped from them who have their 
conversation in error. 

19 And liberty to them they promise, while they 
(themselves) are the servants of corruption; for 
the thing by which a man is overcome, to that he 
is subject. 

2 Eor if [when] they have escaped from the 
pollutions of the world through the knowledge of 
our Lord and Saviour Jeshu Meshiha, with those 
very things entangled they are again overcome, 
their end becomes worse than the beginning. 

?1 For it had been more tolerable for them not to 
have known the way of righteousness, than, 
when they knew, to turn backward from the holy 
commandment delivered to them. 

7? But it hath happened to them according to the 
true proverb, that The dog hath turned unto his 
vomit; the sow which had washed into the 
wallow of the mire. 


3:1 Now this, my beloved, the second epistle | 
write to you; in both of which | awaken to 
remembrance your fair” mind. 

? That you may remember the words which 
were before spoken by the holy prophets, and 
the commandments of our Lord and our Saviour 
(delivered) by the apostles. 

° This first know you, that there will come in the 
last of the days deriders who will deride, as after 
their own lusts they walk, 

* and saying, Where is the promise of his 
advent? for, since our fathers have slept, every 
thing (abideth) as from the beginning of the 
creation. 

° Unknown to them is this while they are willing, 
that the heaven was from of old, and the earth 
from the waters and through the waters*”” 
subsisted, by the word of Aloha: 

ê those (waters) by which the world that then 
was, again (was covered) with waters, and 
perished. 

7 But the heaven which is now, and the earth, 
by his own word are set, being reserved unto 
fire, unto the day of judgment and the perdition 
of wicked men. 

è But this one (truth) be not ignorant of, my 
beloved, That one day with the Lor (is) as a 
thousand years, and a thousand years as one 
day. 

? Not dilatory is the Lorp in his promises, as 
some consider delay; but is patient on your 

°° 2 Peter 3:1 - Reyoncun shaphira 


637 2 Peter 3:5 - Men mdyo, vabyad mdyo komath 


account, not willing that any man should perish, 
but (that) every man to repentance should come. 
1° But the day of the Lorp cometh as a thief: 
that (day) in which the heavens suddenly®® shall 
pass away, but the elements burning be 
dissolved, and the earth and the works that are 
in it be found not. 

11 As, therefore, all these are to be dissolved, 
how behoveth it you to be holy in your 
conversation, and in the fear of Aloha; 

12 expecting and desiring the coming of the day 
of Aloha; that (day) in which the heavens, tried 
with fire, shall be dissolved, and the elements 
burning shall melt? 

13 But new heavens and earth, according to his 
promise, we expect; those wherein 
righteousness dwelleth. 

Wherefore, my beloved, while these you 
expect, be diligent, that, without blemish and 
without spot, of Him you may be found in peace. 
15 And the long-suffering of the Lorp consider 
(to be for) salvation; as also our beloved brother 
Paulos according to the wisdom which hath 
been given to him hath written to you. 

' As in all his epistles he speaks concerning 
these; in which there is somewhat difficult for 
intelligence. Those who are not knowing nor 
settled pervert them, as also the remaining 
scriptures, to their perdition. 

17 You therefore, my beloved, knowing this 
before, keep yourselves, lest, going after the 
error of those who are lawless, you fall from your 
support. 

18 But increase in grace, and in the knowledge 
of our Lord and our Saviour Jeshu Meshiha, and 
(of) Aloha the Father, Whose be glory both now, 
and in all time, and to the days eternal. Amen. 


638 2 Peter 3:10 - Mensheli 


The Epistle of Juhanon The Apostle 


1:1 We announce®” to you that which was from 
the beginning, that which we have heard, and 
seen with our eyes, have seen, and touched 
with our hands, that which is the Word of life. 
? And the life was manifested, and we have 
seen, and testify, and preach to you the eternal 
life which was with the Father, and was 
manifested to us. 
3 And what we have seen and heard, we make 
known also to you, that you may have 
communion with us; and our communion is with 
the Father, and with his Son Jeshu the Meshiha. 
“ And these write we unto you, that our joy 
which is in you may be complete. 
° And this is the annunciation which we have 
heard from him, and announce to you, that 
Aloha is light, and in him is no darkness at all. 
ê And if we say that we have communion with 
him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and in the 
truth do not proceed; 
7 but if in the light we walk, as He is in the light, 
we have communion with one another, and the 
blood of Jeshu his Son cleanseth us from all our 
sins. 
è And if we say that we have no sin, we deceive 
ourselves, and the truth is not in us; 

but if we confess our sins, he is faithful and 
just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us 
from all unrighteousness. 
10 And if we say we have not sinned, we make 
him a liar, and his word is not in us. 


2:1 My sons, these write | to you, that you sin 
not. And if a man shall sin, we have an Advocate 
with the Father, Jeshu Meshiha, the Just; 

? for he is the propitiation for our sins, and not 
on behalf of ours only, but also on behalf of the 
whole world. 

? And by this we feel that we know him, if we 
keep his commandments. 

“ For he who saith that he knoweth him, and his 
commandments keepeth not, is a liar, and the 
truth is not in him. 

° But he who keepeth his word, in him is 
perfected truly the love of Aloha; for by this we 
know that we are in him. 

ê He who saith, | am in him, ought according to 
his walkings to walk. 

7 My beloved, a new commandment | write not 
to you, but the old commandment, that which 


639 4 John 1:1 - Mesabrinan 


was with you from the beginning; but the old 
commandment is the word which you have 
heard. 

è Again, a new commandment | write to you, 
that which is true in him and in you; because the 
darkness hath passed, and the true light 
beginneth to appear. 

? Whoever saith, then, that he is in the light, and 
hateth his brother, is in darkness until now. 

1° He who loveth his brother, in the light abideth, 
and offence is not in him. 

" He who hateth his brother is in darkness, and 
in the darkness walketh, and knoweth not 
whither he goeth, because the darkness itself 
hath blinded his eyes. 

12 | write to you, sons™”, because forgiven to 
you are your sins for the sake of his name. 

13 | write to you, fathers, because you have 
known him who hath been from the beginning. | 
write to you, young men, because you have 
overcome the wicked. | have written to you, 
children®’, because you have known the Father. 

| have written to you, fathers, because you 
have known Him who (hath been) from the 
beginning. | have written to you, young men, 
because you are strong, and the word of Aloha 
remaineth in you, and you have overcome the 
wicked. 

15 Love not the world, nor any thing which is in 
it; for whoever loveth the world, the love of the 
Father is not in him. 

16 For every thing that is in the world, is the lust 
of the body, and the lust of the eyes, and the 
pride of the world. These which are not of the 
Father, but they are from the world itself. 

17 And the world passeth, (both) it and its lusts; 
but he who doeth the will of Aloha, continueth for 
ever. 

18 My sons, it is the last time: and as you have 
heard, the false meshiha cometh; and now there 
are many false meshihas, and from this we 
know that it is the last time. 

19 From us they went forth, but they were not of 
us; for if they had been of us, with us would they 
have remained. But they went forth from us, that 
it might be known that they were not of us. 

20 And you have an anointing from the Holy, and 
you discern every man. 


64 1 John 2:12 - Bnai 


ett 1 John 2:13 - Teloyee 


=" | have not written to you because you know 
not the truth, but you know it, and that no lie is of 
it, of the truth. 

*? Who is a liar, if not he who denieth that Jeshu 
is the Meshiha? And this (one) is a false 
meshiha. He who denieth the Father, denieth 
also the Son; 

?3 and he who denieth the Son, disbelieveth 
also the Father. Whoso confesseth the Son, the 
Father also confesseth. 

*4 And you, what you have heard from the first, 
let it continue with you. For, if what you have 
heard from the first continue with you, you also 
will continue in the Father and in the Son. 

*° And this is the promise which he promised to 
us, eternal life. 

© But these | have written to you, because of 
those who would seduce you. 

*7 And you, also, if the anointing continue with 
you which you have received from him, have not 
need that a man should teach you; but as the 
anointing that is from Aloha itself teacheth you 
concerning every thing, and is true, neither is 
falsity in it; and as it hath taught you, continue in 
it. 

*8 And now, my sons, continue in him: that 
when he is manifested we may not he 
confounded of him, but we may have confidence 
at his coming. 

*° lf you know that he is righteous, know also 
that every one who doeth righteousness is of 
him. 


3:1 And see how great is the love of the Father 
toward us, that sons he hath called us, and also 
made us! Therefore the world doth not know us, 
because that it hath also not known him. 

? My beloved, now are we the sons of Aloha; 
and it is not manifest, as yet, what we are to 
become, but we know, that when he is 
manifested, in his likeness we are and see him, 
according to that which he is. 

? And every one who hath in him this hope, 
purifieth himself, as He is pure. 

But whoever committeth sin doeth iniquity; for 
all sin is iniquity. 

° And you know that he was manifested to bear 
our sins, and sin in him is not. 

And every one who in him abideth, sinneth 
not. And every one who sinneth, hath not seen 
him, nor Known him. 

7 My sons, let no man deceive you: he who 
worketh righteousness is righteous, as also the 
Meshiha himself is righteous. 

è And he who doeth sin is of Satana, because 
that from the commencement Satana was a 


sinner. And for this cause did the Son of Aloha 
appear, that he might destroy the works of 
Satana. 

? Every one who is born of Aloha, sin doth not 
work, because that his seed is in him, and he 
cannot sin, because of Aloha he is born. 

1 In this are distinguished the sons of Aloha 
from the sons of Satana; every one who doeth 
not righteousness, nor loveth his brother, is not 
of Aloha. 

" For this is the commandment which you have 
heard from before, that you love one another. 

Not as Koen, who was from the Evil, and 
killed his brother. And on what account killed he 
him? unless that his own works were evil and his 
brother’s righteous. 

? Do not wonder, my brethren, if the world hate 
you. 

14 We know that we have passed from death 
unto life, by this, that we love our brethren. He 
who loveth not his brother, in death continueth. 

For every one who hateth his brother is a 
man-killer; and we know that in no man-killer 
can abide the life which is eternal. 

16 In this we know His love toward us, that he 
gave himself for us; (so) also it is right for us for 
the sake of our brethren to give ourselves. 

17 And he who hath the possession of the world, 
and shall see his brother that he needeth, and 
shall shut his compassions from him, how is 
there in him the love of Aloha? 

18 My sons, let us not love one another in words 
and in tongue, but in works and in truth. 

19 And by this we make known that we are of 
the truth, and before that he cometh we make 
confident our hearts. 

20 And if our heart condemn us, how much 
(more) Aloha, who is greater than our heart, and 
knoweth every thing! 

?1 My beloved, if our heart condemn us not, we 
have openness of face before Aloha. 

*? And whatever we ask, we shall receive from 
him, because we keep his commandments, and 
do the things which are beautiful” before him. 

?3 And this is his commandment, That we 
believe in the name of his Son Jeshu Meshiha, 
and love one another, as he hath commanded 
us. 

*4 and he who keepeth his commandments, is 
kept by him, and he dwelleth in him: and by this 
we perceive that he dwelleth in us, by his Spirit 
whom®? he hath given to us. 


642 1 John 3:22 - Shaphirtho 


68 1 John 3:24 - Hau d'yahab 


4:1 My beloved, believe not all spirits, but 
discern the spirits whether they be from Aloha; 
because many false prophets have gone forth 
into the world. 

By this we know the Spirit of Aloha: Every 
spirit who confesseth that Jeshu Meshiha hath 
come in the flesh, is from Aloha. 

3 And every spirit who confesseth not that Jeshu 
hath come in the flesh, is not from Aloha: but 
this is from that false meshiha, of whom you 
have heard that he cometh, and now is in the 
world already. 

But you of Aloha are the children, and have 
overcome them; because greater is he who is 
with you, than he who is in the world. 

5 And these are of the world, therefore the world 
heareth them. 

ê But we are of Aloha; and he who knoweth 
Aloha heareth us; and he who is not of Aloha 
heareth us not. In this itself we perceive the 
Spirit of truth and the spirit of deception. 

My beloved, let us love one another, because 
love is of Aloha; and every one who loveth from 
Aloha is born, and knoweth Aloha. 

è For Aloha is Love; and every one who loveth 
not, knoweth not Aloha. 

In this was made known the love of Aloha 
towards us, that Aloha sent his only Son into the 
world that we might live by him. 

10 In this is love: it was not that we had loved 
Aloha, but that Aloha himself loved us, and sent 
his Son a propitiation for our sins. 

" My beloved, if Aloha so hath loved us, we 
also are indebted to love one another. 

12 Aloha no man hath seen; but if we love one 
another, Aloha in us abideth, and his love is 
fulfilled in us. 

13 And by this we know that in him we abide, 
and he abideth in us, because of his Spirit he 
hath given us. 

14 And we have seen and we testify that the 
Father hath sent his Son, the Redeemer of the 
world. 

15 Whosoever confesseth Jeshu that he is the 
Son of Aloha, in him Aloha abideth, and he 
abideth in Aloha. 

'© And we have believed and known the love 
which Aloha hath toward us; for Aloha is Love. 
17 And every one who abideth in love in Aloha 
abideth. And in this is his love perfected with us, 
that openness of face we might have in the day 
of judgment; because that as He was, so also 
we are in this world. 


18 Fear in love is not: but perfect love hath cast 
out fear, because fear is in terror®“*. He who 
feareth is not perfect in love. 

19 We then will love Aloha, because he hath first 
loved us. 

2 But if one shall say, | love Aloha, and his 
brother he hateth, he is a liar. For he who his 
brother whom he hath seen loveth not, how can 
he love Aloha himself whom he hath not seen? 
21 And this commandment we have received 
from him, That every one who loveth Aloha shall 
love also his brother. 


5:1 Whosoever believeth that Jeshu is the 
Meshiha of Aloha is born. And every one who 
loveth the Generator loveth also him who is 
generated of him. 

And by this we know that we love the children 
of Aloha, when we love Aloha, and work his 
commandments. 

° For this is the love of Aloha, that we keep his 
commandments; and his commandments are 
not heavy. 

Because every one who is born of Aloha 
overcometh the world: and this is the victory 
which overcometh the world, our faith. 

° For who (is he) that overcometh the world, but 
he who believeth that Jeshu is the Son of 
Aloha? 

ê This is he who came by water and blood, 
Jeshu the Meshiha: it was not by water only, but 
by water and blood; and the Spirit testifieth, 
because the Spirit himself is truth. 

7 And there are three that testify, the Spirit, and 
the water, and the blood; 

è and these three are in one. 

* If the testimony of men we receive, how much 
greater is the testimony of Aloha? And this is the 
testimony which Aloha hath testified concerning 
his Son. 

10 Whosoever believeth in the Son of Aloha hath 
this testimony in himself. Every one who 
believeth not Aloha hath made him a liar, in not 
believing the testimony that he hath testified 
concerning his Son. 

" And this is the testimony, That the life which 
is eternal, Aloha hath given to us, and this life is 
in his Son. 

12 Every one who apprehendeth®® the Son, 
apprehendeth also life; and every one who 
apprehendeth not the Son of Aloha, hath not life. 


644 1 John 4:18 - Bequento, In periculo.- SCHAFF. 


Root, Quenat, vitavit, extimuit vehementer. Fabricius 
has in perturbation. 


13 These I have written to you, that you may 
know that you have the life which is eternal, who 
believe in the name of the Son of Aloha. 

14 And this is the assurance that we have 
toward him, that all that we ask of him according 
to his will, he heareth us. 

' And if we are persuaded that he heareth us 
concerning what we ask from him, we are 
confident of receiving already the requests that 
we ask from him. 

1€ lf aman shall see his brother sin a sin not 
obnoxious to the death, he shall ask, and life be 
given to him, to those who sin not as unto the 
death. For there is the sin of death;—it is not 
concerning this | say that a man shall pray. 

17 For all iniquity is sin; and there is sin which is 
not of death. 

18 And we know that every one who is born of 
Aloha sinneth not. For he who is born of Aloha 
keepeth himself, and the Evil doth not approach 
him. 

19 We know that we are of Aloha, and the whole 
world in the Evil is lying. 

?° And we know that the Son of Aloha hath 
come, and hath given us knowledge to know the 
truth, and to be in him in the truth, in his Son 
Jeshu the Meshiha. This is Aloha the true, and 
the life which is eternal. 
£n My sons, keep yourselves from the service of 
idols. 


645 1 John 5:12 - Cul d'achid labro 


The Second Epistle of Juhanon 


1:1 The presbyter to the elect Kuria and to her 
sons, whom | love in truth, nor | only, but all they 
who know the truth, 
? on account of the truth which abideth in us, 
and is with us for ever; 
3? Grace be with you and mercy and peace, from 
Aloha the Father, and from Jeshu Meshiha the 
Son of the Father, in truth and in love. 
“| have rejoiced much to have found of thy sons 
who walk in the truth, after the commandment 
we have received from the Father. 
° And now | entreat thee, Kuria,—no new 
commandment writing to thee, but that which we 
have had from the beginning,—that we love one 
another. 
ê And this is love, that we walk according to the 
commandment; this commandment is according 
to that which you have heard from the 
beginning, that in it we should walk. 
’ Because many deceivers are come out into 
the world who confess not that Jeshu Meshiha 
came in the flesh. This is the deceiver and 
antichrist. 
ê Be watchful of yourselves, that not any thing 
perish which you have wrought; but (that with) a 
complete reward you may be recompensed. 
Every one who transgresseth, and abideth not 
in the doctrine of the Meshiha, hath not Aloha®”°. 
He who abideth in his doctrine, this hath both 
the Father and the Son. 

If any one come to you, and this doctrine 
bring not, receive him not into the house, and 
"Joy to you," and " Farewell," say not to him. 

11 Eor he who saith to him, " Farewell,” 
becometh a participator of his evil deeds. 
Though | have many things to write to you, | 
will not with parchment and ink; but | hope to 
come to you, and mouth with mouth to speak, 
that our joy may be complete. 

13 The sons of thy elect sister ask your peace. 
Grace be with you. Amen. 


646 2 John 1:9 - Or, Aloha is not in him 


The Third Epistle of Juhanon 


1:1 The presbyter unto Gaios my beloved, 
whom | love in truth. 

? Our beloved, in all things | pray for thee, that 
thou mayest prosper and be healthful, even as 
thy soul prospereth. 

For | have rejoiced greatly when the brethren 
have come, and have testified concerning thy 
integrity, even as in the truth thou walkest. 

* And greater joy than this | have not (than) 
when I hear that my sons walk in the truth. 

° Our beloved, in faithfulness thou performest 
what thou doest unto the brethren, and 
especially to those who are strangers, 

ê who have testified of thy charity, before all the 
church, to whom thou hast done well according 
to that which is worthy of Aloha. 

’ For after his name they went forth, taking 
nothing from the Gentiles. 

8 We therefore ought to receive such, that we 
may be helpers of the truth. 

* | would have written to the church; but he who 
loveth to be foremost™” of you, Diotrapas, 
receiveth us not. 

10 On account of this, if | come, | will remember 
the works which he doeth, who words of evil 
maketh concerning us; and these not satisfying 
him, he hath not received the brethren, and 
those who receive he forbiddeth, and also 
expelleth from the church. 

" Our beloved, be not imitative of the evil, but 
of the good. He who doeth good is of Aloha, and 
he who doeth evil hath not seen Aloha. 

Concerning Demetrios is a testimony from 
every man, and from the church, and from the 
truth itself. But we also bear witness, and you 
know that our testimony is true. 

13 | have many things which | would write to 
thee, but | will not with ink and reed write to 
thee. 

But | hope that soon | shall see thee, and 
mouth to mouth we will speak. 

15 Peace be with thee. The friends ask thy 
peace. Ask the peace of the friends each by his 
name. 


67 3 John 1:9 - Kadmoyo 


The Epistle of Jihuda 


1:1 Jinuda, servant of Jeshu Meshiha, but 
brother of Jakub, to the called people, who are 
beloved of Aloha the Father, (and) in Jeshu 
Meshiha preserved: 

Mercy and peace in love be multiplied unto 
you. 

My beloved, while giving all diligence to write 
to you concerning our common salvation, it is 
needful for me to write to you, exhorting you (in 
particular) to do battle% for the faith which was 
once delivered to the saints. 

“ For certain men have obtained entrance, who 
from the beginning were proscribed in this 
condemnation; depraved men, who the grace of 
Aloha turn unto lasciviousness, and him who is 
the only Lord GOD, our Lord Jeshu Meshiha, 
deny. 

° But | will to remind you, though all of you 
know, that Aloha, when once the people from 
Metsreen he had redeemed, yet afterward”? 
destroyed them who believed not. 

ê And the angels who kept not their primacy, but 
left their habitation, unto the judgment of the 
great day in chains unknown, under darkness, 
he hath kept. 

As Sadum and Omuro, and the cities which 
were around them, which in manner of them 
committed fornication, and went after other 
flesh, are lying under everlasting fire, 
condemned unto judgment. 

ê In this manner also (will perish) those who, in 
sleep imagining, defile the flesh, but contemn 
government, and blaspheme majesty. 

Yet Mikael, chief of angels, when, with the 
accuser speaking, he contended on account of 
the body of Musha, dared not bring against him 
a reviling judgment, but said, The Lorp rebuke 
thee. 

10 But these the things which they know not 
revile; but through those by which naturally as 
the beasts they are swayed, they are corrupted. 

" Woe to them; for in the way of Koen they 
have gone, and after the error of Belam for gain 
they have burned, and in the rebellion of Kurach 
they have perished. 

12 These are they who, in their recreations 
contaminating, behave wantonly, feeding 
themselves without reverence; clouds without 
rain, roaming with the winds; trees whose fruit 


648 Jude 1:3 - D'aguno tebadun 


6 Jude 1:5 - Or, secondly 


withereth, and which are unfruitful, twice dead, 
and uplifted from their root; 

13 turbulent waves of the sea, which, by their 
foaming, manifest their shame; erring stars, unto 
whom the blackness of darkness that is eternal 
is reserved. 

14 But Hanuk also, who was the seventh from 
Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the 
LorD cometh, with myriads of his saints, 

15 To execute judgment upon all; And to convict 
all the wicked for all their deeds Which they 
have wickedly done; And for all those obdurate 
words Which ungodly sinners have spoken. 

16 These are they who murmur and complain of 
every thing, while walking according to their own 
desires; their mouth speaking portentous things, 
and extolling persons for the sake of gain. 

1” But you, my beloved, remember those words 
which before were spoken by the apostles of our 
Lord Jeshu Meshiha, 

8 who told you that in the last times there would 
be those who scoff, who according to their own 
desires go after wickedness. 

? These are they who separate;—animals, in 
whom the Spirit is not. 

20 But you, my beloved, in your holy faith be 
edified anew, praying in the Holy Spirit, 

ourselves in the love of Aloha to keep, while 
looking for the mercy of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha 
unto our eternal salvation. 

2? And some of them snatch from the fire. 

?3 But when they repent, have compassion on 
them, with fear, hating even the tunic which by 
the flesh is contaminated. 

?4 But to him who is able to keep you without 
falling and without spot, and to establish you 
without blemish, Aloha our only Saviour by 
Jeshu Meshiha our Lord, before his majesty with 
Joy, 
2 Be glory, and dominion, and honour, and 
grandeur, both now and in all ages. Amen. 


The Revelation 


1:1 The Revelation of Jeshu Meshiha, which 
Aloha gave unto him, to show unto his servants 
the things which must be done speedily; and 
which he made known, sending by his angel 
unto his servant Juhanon, 

? who attested the word of Aloha and the 
testimony of Jeshu Meshiha, and all which he 
beheld. 

° Blessed is he who readeth, and they who hear 
the words of this prophecy, and keep those 
which are written therein; for the time hath 
approached. 

* Juhanon to the seven churches which are in 
Asia: grace to you and peace from him who is, 
and who was, and who cometh®”: from the 
seven Spirits who are before his throne; 

5 and from Jeshu Meshiha who is the faithful 
Witness, the First-born of the dead, and Head of 
the kings of the earth, who hath loved us, and 
released" us from our sins by his blood, 

ê and hath made us a priestly kingdom®” unto 
Aloha and his Father; to whom be glory and 
dominion for ever and ever. Amen. 

’ Behold, he cometh with clouds, and all eyes 
shall see him, and they also who transfixed 
him; and for him shall mourn all the tribes of the 
earth. Yes, Amen! 

ê | am Olaph and Thau, saith Aloha the Lorp, 
who is, and who was, and who cometh, the 
Omnipotent®™. 
°? |, Juhanon your brother, and your fellow- 
sharer in the affliction, and in the patience, 
which are in Jeshu Meshiha, was in the island 
which is called Pathamon, for the word of Aloha 
and for the testimony of Jeshu Meshiha. 

10 | was in the Spirit on the Lord’s day®™; and | 
heard behind me a great voice as a trumpet, 
saying, 

11 What thou seest, write in a book; and send to 
the seven churches, at Ephesos, and at 
Smurna, and at Pergamos, and at Thiatira, and 
at Sardis, and at Philidaphia®”, and at Laodikia. 


60 Rev 1:4 - D'othe 


Rev 1:5 - Sharo, solvit 

Rev 1:6 - Malkutho koknoitho, regnum 
sacerdotale 

63 Rev 1:7 - Dadagqruhi 

Rev 1:8 - Lit. Achid kul, The holder or upholder of 
all. So throughout 

6 Rev 1:10 - Yaumo moronoio 

Rev 1:11 - Thus spelt in the Syriac copies 


651 
652 


654 


656 


12 And | turned to see the voice that spake with 
me; and being turned, | saw seven candlesticks 
of gold. 

13 And in the midst of the candlesticks (one) 
who was like the Son of man, clothed to the foot, 
and girded about his paps with a circlet of gold. 

14 But his head and hair were white as wool, 
white as snow; and his eyes (were) as a flame of 
fire, 

15 and his feet were like refined brass®”, which 
flamed as in a furnace, and his voice as the 
voice of many waters. 

16 And he had in his right hand seven stars; and 
from his mouth a sharp sword of two edges went 
forth; and his countenance was as the sun 
shining in his strength. 

17 And when | saw him | fell at his feet as dead. 
And he laid upon me his right hand, saying, Fear 
not: | am the First and the Last; 

18 and who liveth and who have been dead; 
and, behold, | am alive for ever and ever. Amen! 
And | have the keys of death and of Sheul. 

? Write, then, what thou hast seen; and those 
which are, and those which are to be after them. 
20 (This is) the mystery of the seven stars which 
thou sawest in my right hand, and of the seven 
candlesticks of gold: the seven stars are the 
angels of the seven churches, and the seven 
candlesticks are the seven churches. 


2:1 To the angel of the church which is in 
Ephesos, write: These saith the Holder of al 
and of the seven stars in his right hand, who 
walketh in the midst of the seven candlesticks of 
old. 
3 | know thy works, and thy labour, and thy 
patience, and (that) thou canst not bear evils; 
and hast tried those who say they are apostles, 
and are not, and hast found them liars. 
3 And thou hast patience, and hast laboured on 
account of my name, and hast not fainted. 
* But | have against thee, because thy first love 
thou hast forsaken. 
$ Remember, therefore, from whence thou art 
fallen, and repent, and do the first works. But if 
not, | will come to thee quickly, and will remove 
thy candlestick from its place, if thou convert not. 
ê But this thou hast, that thou hatest the works 
of the Nikolitu, which also | (hate). 


658 
l a 


67 Rey 1:15 - Nechosho Lebanonoio 


68 Rey 2:1 - Achid Kul 


7 He who hath ears, let him hear what the Spirit 
saith to the churches. To him who overcometh | 
will give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the 
paradise of my God. 

ê And to the angel of the church which is in 
Smurna, write: These saith the First and the 
Last, who was dead, and liveth. 

? | know thy works, and affliction, and poverty, 
but thou art rich; and the blasphemy of them 
who say of themselves that they are Jinudoyee, 
and are not, but the synagogue of Satana. 

'° Fear not any thing of those that thou art to 
suffer; for, behold, it will be that the accuser will 
cast some of you into prison, so that you may be 
tried; and you will have affliction ten days. Be 
faithful unto the death, and | will give thee the 
crown of life. 

" He who hath ears, let him hear what saith the 
Spirit to the churches. He who overcometh shall 
not be injured by the second death. 

12 And to the angel of the church which is in 
Pergamos, write: These saith he who hath the 
sharp sword with two edges. 

13 | know thy works, and where thou dwellest, 
where (is) the throne of Satana; and thou hast 
held my name, and not denied my faith in those 
days when my witness was exposed’, my 
faithful one, who was killed with you where 
dwelleth Satana. 

14 But I have against thee a little®°, because 
thou hast there those who hold the doctrine of 
Belam, who taught Balok to cast a stumbling- 
block before the sons of Israel, to eat that which 


the sons of idols (eat), and to commit fornication. 


15 So hast thou who hold the doctrine of the 
Nikolitu: 

16 of it, in like (manner), repent; and if not, | will 
come to thee quickly, and will war against them 
with the sword of my mouth. 

7 He who hath ears, let him hear what saith the 
Spirit to the churches. To him who overcometh 
will | give to eat of the manna which is hidden; 
and | will give to him the white stone®®', and 
upon the stone a new name written, which no 
man knoweth but he who receiveth. 


69 Rey 2:13 - Or, became a spectacle. But, instead of 


ETHCHAZAITH, spectaculum factus est, the Polyglots 
read ETHCHARITH AM; "Thou wast in conflict along 
with my witness, my faithful one." 

6€ Rey 2:14 - A few things."-POLYGLOT 

Rev 2:17 - Chushbono, rationale. Query, a 
breastplate? 


661 


18 And to the angel and church®” which is in 
Thiatiros, write: These saith the Son of Aloha, 
who hath his eyes as the flame of fire, and his 
feet like refined brass. 

19 | know thy works, and thy love and faith and 
service; and also thy patience, and thy last 
works to be greater than the first. 

2 But | have against thee that thou permittest 
thy wife Izabel, who calleth herself a prophetess, 
to teach and seduce my servants to commit 
fornication, and to eat what the sons of idols 
(eat). 

?1 And | gave her time when she might convert, 
and she willed not to repent of her fornication. 

?? Behold, | cast her into a bed, and those who 
have committed adultery with her into great 
affliction, if they repent not of their works. 

?3 And her sons will | kill with death, and all the 
churches shall know that | am he who searcheth 
the reins and the hearts: and | will give to you 
every One according to your works. 

?4 But to you | say, to those of the rest who are 
in Thiatiros, all them who have not this doctrine, 
the men who know not the depths*™ of Satana, 
as they speak; | will not throw upon you another 
burden; 

*° but that which you have, hold, until | come. 
2è And he who conquereth, and he who keepeth 
until the end my works, | will give to him 
power 6° over the peoples, 

7 and he shall rule them with a rod of iron, and 
as a vessel of the potter shall they be destroyed, 
as also | have received from my Father; 

*8 and | will give to him the morning star. 
2° He who hath ears, let him hear what the Spirit 
saith to the churches. 


663 


3:1 And to the angel who is in Sardis write: 
These saith he who hath the seven Spirits of 
Aloha, and the seven stars: | know thy works, 
that a name thou hast that thou livest, and thou 
art dead. 

? Awake, and keep those things which remain, 
which are about to die; for | have not found thy 
works complete before my God. 

Remember then how thou hast received, and 
hearken, and keep, and repent. And if then thou 
wilt not awake, | will come against thee as the 


6€2 Rey 2:18 - So SCHAFF'S text, but not WALTON'S 


°°? Rey 2:20 - WALTON, "To eat the sacrifices of 
idols." 
64 Rev 2:24 - Amikthé 


6 Rey 2:26 - Shultono 


thief, and thou shalt not know in what hour | 
come against thee. 
* But thou hast a few names in Sardis who have 
not defiled their vestments; and they shall walk 
with me in white, because they are worthy. 
° He who overcometh shall be clothed in white 
vestments, and | will not blot their®®° name from 
the book of life; and | will confess their name 
before my Father, and before his angels. 
ê He who hath ears, let him hear what the Spirit 
saith to the churches. 
7 And to the angel of the church which is in 
Philadelphia write: These saith the Holy, the 
True, who hath the key of David; who openeth 
and no man shutteth®®’, and who shutteth and 
no man openeth. 
ê I know thy works; and, behold, I have given 
before thee an open door, which no man can 
shut; because thou hast a little strength, and 
hast kept my word, and hast not denied my 
name. 
? Behold, | will give [to those] of the synagogue 
of Satana, who say that they are Jihudoyee, and 
are not, but lie; behold, I will make them to come 
and worship before thy feet, and they shall know 
that | have loved thee. 
1 Because thou hast kept the word of my 
patience, | will keep thee from the hour of 
temptation, which is to come upon all the 
habitable world, to try them who dwell upon the 
earth. 
11 | come quickly. Hold that which thou hast, 
that no man take thy crown. 
12 Him who overcometh I will make a column in 
the temple of my God, and he shall go out no 
more; and | will write upon him the name of my 
God, and of Urishlem the new, which 
descendeth from heaven from my God, and my 
new name. 
13 He who hath ears, let him hear what the Spirit 
saith to the churches. 
14 And to the angel of the church which is in 
Ladikia write: These saith the Amen, the 
Witness, the faithful, the true, the Head of the 
creation of Aloha. 
15 | know thy works, that thou art neither hot nor 
cold. Would that thou wast cold or hot! 
16 So, because thou art lukewarm, and neither 
hot nor cold, | will vomit thee from my mouth. 
Because thou sayest, | am rich, and have 
become opulent, and of nothing have need; and 
knowest not that thou art infirm, and miserable, 
and needy, and blind, and naked; 
eè Rey 3:5 - Shemo dilhun 


°°7 Rey 3:7 - Lit. holdeth both instances 


18 | counsel thee to buy of me gold, proved by 
fire, that thou mayest be rich; and white raiment, 
that thou mayest be clothed, and the shame of 
thy nakedness be not seen; and lave with 
collyrium thine eyes, that thou mayest see. 

19 All those whom | love, | reprove and chasten: 
be zealous therefore, and repent. 

2 Behold, | stand at the door and knock: if any 
man hear my voice, and will open the door, | will 
enter unto him, and will sup with him, and he 
with me. 

21 And to him who overcometh | will give to sit 
with me upon my throne, as also | have 
overcome, and have sat with my Father in his 
throne. 

?? He who hath ears, let him hear what the Spirit 
saith to the churches. 


4:1 After these | saw, and, behold, a door (was) 
open in heaven. And the first voice that | had 
heard as a trumpet talking with me, said, Come 
up hither, and | will make thee see the (things) 
which must be after these. 

At once | was in the spirit: and, behold, a 
throne®®® placed in heaven, and upon the throne 
(One) sat. 

3 And he who sat was like to the appearance of 
the stone of jaspon, and of sardion; and the bow 
of the clouds was around the throne, in 
resemblance to the appearance of zmragda. 

* Around the throne®® were seats®” twenty and 
four; and upon those seats twenty and four 
presbyters°”' sitting, who were robed in white 
vestments, and upon their heads wore 
coronets°” of gold. 

° And from the throne went forth lightnings and 
the voice of thunders. And there were seven 
lamps of fire which burned before His throne, 
which are the seven Spirits of Aloha. 

ê And before the throne was a sea of 
brightness°” like chrystalos; and in the midst of 
the throne, and around it, and before the throne, 
four living-ones®”, who were full of eyes before 
and behind. 


e8 Rey 4:2 and - Ku rsio, a seat of state 


Rev 4:4a - Thronos 

Rev 4:4b - Kursothee 

Rev 4:4c - Kashishee 

Rev 4:4d - Kalilee 

Rev 4:6a - Zagugitho, Heb. Zechuchith; root, 
zakak, to shine, be transparent 

674 Rev 4:6b - Chaivothee, "animated beings; "from 
chai, "to live." 


669 
670 
671 
672 
673 


7 And the first living-one was like the lion, and 
the second living-one was like the calf, and the 
third living-one had a face as a man, and the 
fourth living-one was like the eagle which flieth. 
è And these four living-ones, each of them, had 
six wings round about; and within were full of 
eyes; and they rest not day and night from 
saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lornp God Almighty, 
Who wast, and art, and art to come. 

? And when those living-ones give glory and 
honour and thanks°” unto Him who sitteth upon 
the throne, to Him who liveth for ever and ever, 
10 the four and twenty presbyters fell before Him 
who sitteth upon the throne, and worshipped 
Him who liveth for ever and ever, and cast their 
crowns before the throne, saying, 

11 Worthy art thou, O Lord, And our God the 
Holy One, To receive glory and honour and 
power; For thou hast created all, And by thy 
hand they are, And through thy will they were 
and are created. 


5:1 And | saw in the right hand of him who sat 
on the throne a writing which was written within 
and on the back, and sealed®”° with seven 
seals”. 
? And I saw a mighty angel who proclaimed with 
a great voice: Who is worthy to open the book, 
and to loose the seals thereof? 
? And no one was able, in heaven above, nor 
upon earth, nor under the earth, to open the 
book, or to inspect it. 
“ And | wept much, because no one could be 
found who was worthy to open the book, or to 
inspect it. 
° And one of the presbyters said to me, Weep 
not; behold, the Lion of the tribe of Jinuda, who 
is the root of David, hath prevailed. He will open 
the book and the seven seals°” thereof. 
ê And | saw, in the midst of the presbyters, a 
Lamb standing, as slain, who had seven horns 
and seven eyes which are the seven Spirits of 
Aloha, which are sent forth to all the earth. 

And he came and took the book from the right 
hand of him who sat upon the throne. 
è And when he had taken the book, the four 
living-ones and the twenty and four presbyters 
fell down before the Lamb, having each of them 


€75 Rev 4:9 - More strictly, (kubol-taibutho,) 


acceptance of thanks, that is, as by the divine hand 
€76 Rey 5:1a - Tabi 

Rev 5:1b - Tabee 

Rev 5:5 - Chetomee 


677 
678 


an harp, and vials of gold full of perfumes, which 
are the prayers of the saints. 

? And they hymned a new hymn, saying, Thou 
art worthy to take the book, And to open the 
seals thereof; Because thou wast slain, And hast 
redeemed us to Aloha by thy blood, From every 
tribe and tongue and people and nation. 

10 And thou hast made them?” to our God kings 
and priests, And reigning upon the earth. 

" And | saw and heard as the voice of many 
angels around the throne, and the living-ones, 
and the presbyters, and the number of them was 
ten thousand times ten thousand, and 
thousands of thousands, 

which said with a great voice, Worthy is the 

Lamb that was slain, To receive power, and 
riches, and wisdom, and strength, And honour, 
and glory, and blessing, 

3 And every creature which is in heaven, and 
on earth, And under the earth, and in the sea, 
And all them which are therein. And | heard him 
who sat upon the throne saying: To the Lamb let 
there be given blessing, and honour, and glory, 
and praise, and dominion, for ever and ever and 
ever. 

14 And the four living-ones said, Amen! And the 
presbyters fell, and worshipped. 


6:1 And | saw, when the Lamb had opened one 
of the SEVEN SEALS. And | heard one of the 
four living-ones speaking as the voice of 
thunder, Come, and see! 

? And I looked: and there was a white horse; 
and he who sat upon him had a bow, and there 
was given to him a crown; and he went forth 
conquering, so that he might conquer. 

3 And when he had opened the SECOND 
SEAL, | heard the second living-one, who said, 
Come! 

* And there went out another horse (which was) 
red; and to him who sat upon him was given to 
take peace from the earth, and thus that one 
another they should kill; and there was given to 
him a great sword. 

° And when he had opened the THIRD SEAL, | 
heard the third living one, saying, Come, and 
see! And | saw, and, behold, a black horse, and 
he who sat upon him had a balance in his hand. 
ê And I heard a voice from the midst of the four 
living-ones, saying, A choenix of wheat for a 
dinar; And three choenices of barley for a dinar; 
And the oil and the wine hurt not. 


© Rey 5:10 - Enun 


7 And when he had opened the FOURTH SEAL, 
| heard the fourth living-one, saying, Come, and 
see! 

è And | saw a green horse”, and he who sat 
upon him had the name of Death, and Shiul 
followed after him. And there was given to him 
power over the fourth of the earth, to kill with the 
sword, and with famine, and with death, and with 
the toothed beast of the earth. 

? And when he had opened the FIFTH SEAL, | 
saw under the altar the souls of them who had 
been killed for the word of Aloha, and for the 
testimony of the Lamb, which had been theirs. 

10 And they cried with a great voice, saying, 
Until when, O Lorpb, holy (and) true, Dost thou 
not judge and avenge our blood On those who 
dwell upon the earth? 

11 And there was given to each of them the 
white robe; and it was told them, that they 
should rest yet a little time, until should be 
completed their fellow-servants, their brethren 
who would be killed as also they. 

12 And | saw when he opened the SIXTH SEAL, 
there was a great movement; and the sun 
became black as sackcloth of hair, and all the 
moon became as blood; 

13 and the stars of heaven fell to the earth, as 
the fig-tree casteth her figs, when from a great 
wind she is shaken. 

14 And the heavens were sundered®’ as a book 
that is rolled, and all the mountains and islands 
from their places were moved; 

15 and the kings of the earth and great ones, 
and the chiefs of thousands, and the rich and 
the mighty ones, and every servant, and every 
freeman, hid them in the caverns, and in the 
rocks of the mountains, 

1€ saying to the mountains and to the rocks, Fall 
upon us, and hide us from the face of him who 
sitteth upon the throne and from the wrath of the 
Lamb. 

For the great day of their wrath has come, 
and who is able to stand? 


7:1 And after these, | saw four angels standing 
upon the four corners of the earth, holding the 
four winds of the earth, that the winds should not 
blow upon the earth, nor upon the sea, nor upon 
the trees. 

? And | saw another angel, and he ascended 
from the rising of the sun; who had the seal of 
Aloha the Living. And he cried with a great voice 


€80 Rev 6:8 - Susio Uroko 


e81 Rev 6:14 - Ethphareshu 


to the four angels to whom it had been given to 
hurt the earth and the sea, saying, 

° Hurt not the earth, nor the sea, neither the 
trees, until we have sealed the servants of our 
God upon their foreheads. 

“ And | heard the number of them who were 
sealed, an hundred and forty and four 
thousands, sealed of every tribe of Israel: 

5 of the tribe of Jihuda, twelve thousand were 
sealed; of the tribe of Rubill, twelve thousand; of 
the tribe of Gad, twelve thousand; 

ê of the tribe of Ashir, twelve thousand; of the 
tribe of Naphtoli, twelve thousand; of the tribe of 
Manasha, twelve thousand; 

of the tribe of Shemun, twelve thousand; of the 
tribe of Levi, twelve thousand; of the tribe of 
Isokar, twelve thousand; 

of the tribe of Zabolon, twelve thousand; of the 
tribe of Jauseph, twelve thousand; of the tribe of 
Benjomin, twelve thousand [were sealed.] 

? After these | saw, and, behold, a great 
assembly, which to number no man was able, 
from all people and nations and tribes and 
tongues, were standing before the throne and 
before the Lamb, arrayed in white robes, and 
with palms in their hands; 

and, crying with a great voice, said, Salvation 
to our God! To him who sitteth on the throne, 
And to the Lamb! 

1! And all the angels stood around the throne, 
and the presbyters, and the four living-ones; and 
they fell before his throne upon their faces, and 
worshipped Aloha, 

12 saying, Amen. Blessing, and glory, and 
wisdom, and thanksgiving, And honour, and 
might, and power, To our God, for ever and 
ever. Amen. 

13 And one of the presbyters answered and said 
to me:---These, who are arrayed in white robes, 
who are they? And from whence do they come? 

And | said to him, My lord, thou knowest. And 
he said to me, These are they who have come 
from great affliction, and have washed their 
robes, and made them white in the blood of the 

Lamb. 

15 On account of this they are before the throne 
of Aloha, and minister to him day and night in his 
temple. And he who sitteth upon the throne will 
protect them®”. 

They will not hunger or thirst again, nor will 
the sun come down upon them, nor any heat; 

17 for it is the Lamb who is in the midst of the 
throne who will feed them, and will lead them 


682 Rey 7:15 - Nageen alihun, "shadow over them." 


unto fountains of living waters, and Aloha will 
wipe away every tear from their eyes. 


8:1 And when he had opened the SEVENTH 
SEAL, silence was in heaven, as the dividing of 
an hour. 

? And | saw the seven angels who stood before 
Aloha, and there were given to them SEVEN 
TRUMPETS. 

3 And another angel came, and stood at the 
altar, and he had a censer of gold, and many 
perfumes were given to him, which he should 
give with the prayers of all saints upon the altar 
of gold that is before the throne; 

and the cloud®®? of the perfumes of the 
prayers of the saints ascended from the hand of 
the angel before Aloha. 

° And the angel took the censer, and filled it 
from the fire of the altar, and cast forth upon the 
earth. And there were thunders, and lightnings, 
and voices, and movement. 

ê And the seven angels which had the seven 
trumpets prepared them to sound. 

7 And the First sounded. And there was hail, 
and fire mingled with the waters, and they were 
cast upon the earth; and the third of the earth 
burned, and the third of the trees burned, and 
every green herb burned. 

è And the Second angel sounded. And as a 
great mountain burning with fire was cast into 
the sea; and the third of the sea also became 
blood. 

? And the third of all creatures which were in the 
sea, which had lives, died, and the third of the 
ships were destroyed. 

10 And the Third angel sounded. And there fell 
from heaven a star burning as a lamp, and it fell 
upon the third of the rivers, and upon fountains 
of waters. 

11 And the name of the star is called 
Aphsinthos; and the third of the waters became 
bitterness, and many men died from the waters 
because they were bitter. 

12 And the Fourth angel sounded. And the third 
of the sun was absorbed, and the third of the 
moon, and the third of the stars, as that the third 
of them should be darkened; and they were 
darkened, and the day shone not a third of it, 
and the night, in like manner. 

13 And | beheld, and heard an eagle”, flying in 
the midst, having a tail of blood®®”’, saying with a 


683 Rev 8:4 - Ataro 


great voice, Woe, woe, to those who dwell upon 
earth, from the voice of the rest of the trumpets 
of the three angels which are about to sound! 


9:1 And the Fifth angel sounded. And I saw a 
star which fell from heaven unto the earth and 
there was given to him the key of the pit of the 
abyss®®°. 

? And he opened the pit of the abyss, and 
smoke ascended from the pit, as the smoke of a 
burning furnace; and the sun was darkened, and 
the air, from the smoke of the pit. 

3 And from the smoke came forth locusts upon 
the earth. And there was given to them power 
such as scorpions have upon the earth. 

* And it was told them, that they should not hurt 
the herbage of the earth, nor any green (thing), 
nor any tree, but only those men who had not 
the seal of Aloha upon their foreheads. 

5 And it was given them, that they should not kill 
them, but torture them five months. And their 
torture was as the torture of a scorpion when he 
striketh a man. 

ê And in those days men shall seek death, and 
shall not find; and shall desire to die, and death 
will flee from them. 

7 And the likeness of those locusts (was this): 
they resemble the appearance” of horses 
prepared for battle. And upon their heads (was) 
a crown of the likeness of gold; and their faces 
(were) as the faces of men. 

è And they had hair as the hair of women, and 
their teeth were as of lions; 

? and they had breast-plates as breast-plates of 
iron, and the sound of their wings was as the 
sound of the chariots of many horses running to 
battle. 

10 And they had tails like those of scorpions, 
and stings; and in their tails they have power to 
hurt men five months. 

" And they had a king over them, the angel of 
the abyss, and his name in Hebrew is Abadon; 
but in Javanith his name is Apolon. 

One woe hath gone. Behold, two woes yet 
come after it. 


° Rey 8:13a - An eagle. This is considered a good 


reading, and has been given by Griesbach in his 
Greek text 

68 Rev 8:13b - Here the Syriac text varies. The Greek 
copy, by separating into multiple words, reads, "in 
the midst of heaven." 

°° Rev 9:1 - Biro dathumo 


687 Rey 9:7 - Or, they are like as the likeness of 


13 And the Sixth angel sounded. And | heard 
one voice from the horns of the altar of gold 
which was before Aloha, 

14 saying to the sixth angel who had the 
trumpet, Release the four angels which are 
bound in the great river Phraat. 

15 And the four angels were released, they who 
were prepared for an hour, and for a day, and 
for a month, and for a year, to kill the third (part) 
of men. 

1€ And the number of the host of the horsemen 
was two myriads of myriads. | heard the number 
of them. 

17 And as | beheld those horses in the vision, 
and those who sat upon them, (I saw that) they 
had breast-plates of fire, and jacinth, and 
sulphur; and the heads of the horses were as 
the heads of lions, and from their mouths went 
out fire, and smoke, and sulphur. 

18 And by these three plagues were the third of 
men killed; from the fire, and from the smoke, 
and from the sulphur which went out of their 
mouths. 

19 For the power of the horses is in their mouth 
and in their tails: for their tails were like serpents 
which had heads, and with them they wound. 

2 And the rest of men who were not killed by 
those plagues, did not repent of the works of 
their hands, that they should not worship 
demons and idols of gold and of silver and of 
brass and of stone and of wood, which can 
neither see nor hear; 

?1 nor repented they of their murders, nor of 
their sorceries, nor of their fornications, nor of 
their robberies. 


10:1 And | saw another mighty angel 
descending from heaven, clothed (with a) cloud, 
and the bow of the cloud (was) upon his head; 
and his countenance was as the sun, and his 
feet as columns of fire. 

? And he had in his hand an open book; and he 
set his right foot upon the sea, but the left upon 
the land, 

and cried with a great voice, as the roar of a 
lion. And when he had cried, seven thunders 
spoke their voices. 

And when those seven thunders had spoken, | 
was about to write. And | heard a voice from 
heaven, which said, Seal those (things) which 
the seven thunders have spoken, and write them 
not. 

5 And the angel whom I saw standing upon the 
sea and upon the land, lifted his right hand to 
heaven, and 


ê sware by Him who liveth for ever and ever, 
who created heaven and those who are in it, and 
the earth and those that are in it, and the sea 
and those that are in it, That time no more shall 
be; 

7 but (that) in the days of the voice of the 
seventh angel, when he is about to sound, the 
mystery of Aloha shall be completed, as he hath 
declared to his servants the prophets. 

è And the voice which I heard from heaven 
spake with me again, and said, Go, take the 
book which is open in the hand of the angel who 
standeth upon the sea and upon the land. 

? And | went to the angel, and said to him, Give 
me the book. And he said to me, Take, and eat 
it; and it will embitter thee thy belly, but in thy 
mouth it will be sweet as honey. 

° And I took the book from the hand of the 
angel, and ate it. And it was in my mouth as 
sweet as honey; and when I had eaten it my 
belly was made bitter. 

" And he said to me, It behoves thee yet to 
prophesy concerning many nations, and 
concerning peoples and princes and kings. 


11:1 And there was given to me a reed, like a 
staff; and the angel stood, saying, Arise, 
measure the temple of Aloha, and the altar, and 
them who worship therein; 

? and the court which is without the temple cast 
out®*, and do not measure it, because it is given 
to the Gentiles, and the holy city shall be 
trodden down, MONTHS FORTY AND TWO. 

3 And I will give my two witnesses, and they 
shall prophesy, DAYS A THOUSAND AND TWO 
HUNDRED AND SIXTY, clothed in sackcloth. 

“These are the two olive (trees) and two 
candlesticks which before the Lord of the earth 
do stand. 

° And if a man willeth to wound them, fire 
cometh forth from their mouth, and devoureth 
their adversaries. And if a man willeth to wound 
(them), thus must he be killed. 

These have power to shut heaven, that rain it 
may not rain in those days®*”’; and power have 
they over the waters, to turn them into blood, 
and to smite the earth with every plague as 
many times as they will. 

7 And when they shall have completed their 
testimony, the beast of prey, which ascended 
from the abyss, will make war against them, and 
overcome them, [and kill them, ®”?] 
e88 Rey 11:2 - Aphek men lebar 
Rev 11:6 - "Days of prophecy."-POLYGLOTS 
Rev 11:7 - Ibid 


689 
690 


è and their dead bodies (will be) upon the wide 
street of the great city, which is called, 
spiritually, Sedum, and Metsreen, where also 
our Lord hath been crucified. 

* And of the peoples and tribes and nations and 
tongues, seeing their dead bodies days three 
and a half, will not suffer them to be laid in the 
tomb. 

10 And they who dwell upon earth will rejoice 
over them and be gratified, and will send gifts to 
one another, because these two prophets 
tormented them who dwell upon earth. 

" And after those three days and a half, the 
spirit of life from Aloha entered into them, and 
they arose upon their feet. And great fear fell 
upon them who saw them. 

12 And they heard®”' a great voice from heaven, 
saying to them, Ascend hither. And they 
ascended to heaven in a cloud, and their 
adversaries beheld them. 

3 And in that hour there was a great movement; 
and one of ten of the city fell; and there were 
killed in the movement the names of men seven 
thousand. And they who were left were made 
afraid, and gave glory to Aloha. 

14 That second woe hath passed. Behold, the 
third woe cometh quickly. 

15 And the Seventh angel sounded. And there 
were voices and thunders, saying, The kingdom 
of the world Is of our Lord, and of his Meshiha; 
And he will reign for ever and ever! 

'© And the twenty and four presbyters who were 
before the throne of Aloha, who were sitting 
upon their thrones, fell upon their faces and 
worshipped, 

17 saying, We give thanks to thee, Lorp God 
omnipotent, Who art, and who wast; Because 
thou hast taken thy great power, And hast 
reigned. 

18 And the nations were angry; But thy wrath is 
come, And the time of the dead, That they 
should be avenged; And to give reward to thy 
servants, To the prophets, and to the saints, And 
to them who fear thy Name, To the small and to 
the great; And to destroy them who have 
destroyed the earth. 

19 And the temple of Aloha was opened in 
heaven; and there was seen the ark of his 
covenant in his temple. And there were 
lightnings, and thunderings, and voices, and 
movement, and great hail. 


12:1 And a great sign was seen in heaven; a 
woman clothed with the sun, and the moon 


61 Rev 11:12 - "I heard"-POLYGLOTS 


beneath her feet, and upon her head a crown of 
twelve stars. 

? And having in her womb, she cried, and was in 
travail, and was pained to give birth. 

3 And I saw another sign in heaven; and behold 
a great dragon of fire, which had seven heads 
and ten horns, and upon his heads seven 
diadems. 

* And his tail drew the third of the stars of 
heaven, and cast them to the earth. And the 
dragon stood before the woman when she was 
about to give birth, that when she had given birth 
he might devour her son. 

° And she gave birth to a male child, who is to 
rule all nations with a rod of iron; and her son 
was rapt unto Aloha and unto his throne. 

ê And the woman fled into the desert, where she 
had a place prepared of Aloha, that there they 
might nourish her, DAYS A THOUSAND AND 
TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY. 

7 And there was war in heaven. And Mikoel and 
his angels [came] to fight with the dragon; and 
the dragon and his angels warred. 

And they could not prevail, and their place was 
found no more in heaven. 

* And the great dragon was cast down, the old 
serpent, who is called the Deceiver, and the 
Adversary, which seduceth the whole habitable 
world. And he was cast upon the earth, and his 
angels with him were cast. 

1° And | heard a great voice in heaven saying, 
Now is there salvation and strength, And the 
kingdom of our God, And the power of his 
Meshiha; Because the accuser of our brethren is 
cast down, Who accused them before Aloha day 
and night. 

" And they overcame him by the blood of the 
Lamb, And by the word of his testimony. But 
they loved not their lives unto death. 

? Wherefore let the heavens be glad, And 
those who dwell in them. Woe to the earth and 
to the sea! Because the deceiver hath gone 
down to you, Having great indignation, Knowing 
that little time is to him. 

13 And when the dragon saw that he was cast 
down upon the earth, he pursued the woman 
which gave birth to the son. 

14 And there were given to the woman two 
wings of a great eagle, that she might fly into the 
desert unto her place, where she was to be 
nourished A TIME, AND TIMES, AND THE 
DIVIDING OF A TIME, from the face of the 
serpent. 

15 And the serpent cast forth from his mouth 
after the woman waters like a river, as that she 


might be carried off by the river which he would 
make. 

1€ And the earth succoured the woman, and the 
earth opened her mouth, and swallowed the 
river which the dragon had cast forth from his 
mouth. 

And the dragon raged against the woman, 
and went to make war with those of the rest of 
her seed which kept the commandments of 
Aloha, and had the testimony of Jeshu. 


13:1 And he stood upon the sand of the sea. 
And | saw that a beast of prey®” ascended from 
the sea, having ten horns and seven heads, and 
upon his horns seven diadems; and upon his 
heads names of blasphemy. 

? And the beast of prey which | saw was like a 
leopard, and his feet were as (those) of a bear, 
and his mouth as the mouth of a lion, and the 
dragon gave to him his power, and his throne, 
and great authority. 

And one of his heads was wounded as to 
death. And his stroke of death was healed; and 
all the earth wondered after the beast of prey. 

* And they worshipped the dragon because he 
had given authority to the beast of prey, [saying, 
Who is like the beast of prey,] and who is able to 
make war with him? 

° And there was given him a mouth speaking 
great sayings and blasphemies, and authority 
was given him to act, MONTHS, FORTY AND 
TWO. 

ê And he opened his mouth to blaspheme 
against Aloha, blaspheming his name, and his 
tabernacle, and those who dwell in heaven. 

7 And there was given to him authority over 
every tribe, and people, and tongue, and nation; 
and there was given to him to make war with the 
saints, to overcome them. 

è And all those who inhabit on the earth will 
worship him, they whose name is not written in 
the book of life of the Lamb from the foundation 
of the world. 

If aman have ears, let him hear. 

If any man into captivity leadeth, into captivity 
he shall go. If any man kill with the sword, it 
behoveth him by the sword to be killed. This is 
the patience and the faith of the saints. 


10 


62 Rev 13:1 -Literally, (chaivith sheno,) a beast of the 


tooth, i. e., a carnivorous animal. The same 
expression occurs throughout. 


1! And | saw another beast of prey ascending 
from the earth; and he had two horns like those 
of the lamb, and he spake as the dragon. 

12 And all the authority of the first beast of prey 
he exercised before him; and he made the earth 
and those who inhabit therein to worship the first 
beast of prey, whose wound of death was 
healed. 

13 And he wrought great signs, as that also he 
would make fire to come down from heaven 
upon earth before men. 

14 And he will seduce those who dwell upon 
earth to the making an image of the beast of 
prey who had the wound of the sword and lived. 

° And it was given to him to give spirit to the 
image of the beast of prey, [that the image also 
of the beast of prey should speak,] and to cause 
that all those whosoever who worshipped not 
the image of the beast of prey should be killed. 

16 And he caused all, small and great, and rich 
and poor, and sons of freedom and slaves, to 
have given to them a signature upon their right 
hands, or upon their foreheads; 

as that no man might be able to buy or sell, 
unless he had the signature of the name of the 
beast of prey, or the number of his name. 

Here is wisdom. Let him who hath mind, 
calculate the number of the beast of prey; for the 
number is of man; and his number is Six 
hundred and sixty and six. 


14:1 And | saw, and, behold, the Lamb stood 
upon the mountain of Sion, and with him the 
number, an hundred and forty and four 
thousand, who had his name, and the name of 
his Father, written upon their foreheads. 

* And I heard a voice from heaven, as the 
sound of many waters, and as the sound of 
great thunder; and the voice which | heard was 
as harpers striking on their harps. 

3 And they hymned a new hymn before the 
throne, and before the four living-ones, and the 
presbyters. And no man was able to learn the 
hymn, but the hundred and forty and four 
thousand [who were redeemed from the 
earth™]. 

“These are they who with women have not 
been defiled, for they are virgins. These are they 
who follow the Lamb wherever he goeth. These 
by Jeshu were redeemed from men, first-fruits 
unto Aloha and to the Lamb. 

° And in their mouth falsehood was not found, 
for they are without spot. 


63 Rey 14:3 - Ibid 


ê And | saw another angel flying through 
heaven, who with blood™ had the everlasting 
gospel to preach to them who dwell on the earth, 
and unto every nation and tribe, and tongue and 
people; 

7 saying with a great voice, Serve Aloha, and 
give him glory: For the hour of his judgment 
cometh: And worship him who made heaven 
and earth, And the sea, and the fountains of 
waters. 

è And another angel, a second, followed him, 
saying, Fallen, fallen is Babel the Great, Which 
of the wine of the rage of her fornication Hath 
made all nations to drink. 

* And another angel, a third, followed them 
saying with a great voice, If any man worship the 
beast of prey and his image, And receive his 
mark on his brow, or in his hand, 

'° He also shall drink of the wine of the wrath of 
Aloha, Which is mingled without sparing In the 
cup of his anger. And he shall be tormented in 
fire and sulphur, Before his holy angels and 
before the throne: 

1 And the smoke of their torment For ever and 
ever will ascend. And they have no rest day and 
night Who worship the beast of prey and his 
image. 

? Here is the patience of the saints, Who keep 
the commandments of Aloha, And the faith of 
Jeshu. 

13 And | heard a voice from heaven, saying, 
Write, Blessed are the dead Who in Aloha die 
from now. Yes, saith the Spirit, That they may 
rest from their labours, For their works follow 
with them. 

14 And | looked, and behold a white cloud, and 
upon the cloud sat (one) like the Son of man, 
having on his head a crown of gold, and in his 
hand a sharp sickle. 

13 And another angel came out of the temple, 
crying with a great voice to him who sat upon 
the cloud. 

'© And he thrust his sickle over the earth, and 
the earth was reaped. 

17 And another angel came out of the temple 
which is in heaven, having also a sharp sickle. 

18 And another angel came forth from the altar 
who had authority over the fire, and he cried with 
a great cry to him who had the sharp sickle, 
saying, Send forth thy sharp sickle, and reap the 
clusters of the vintage of the earth; for the 
grapes of the earth are ripe. 


69% Rev 14:6 - So SCHAFF, DE DIEU, and GUTBIR'S 


texts: but the Polyglots have not "with blood." 


19 And the angel thrust forth his sickle unto the 
earth, and reaped the vintage of the earth, and 
he cast into the winepress of the wrath of Aloha 
the Great. 

2 And the winepress was trodden [without the 
city, and blood flowed from the winepress] unto 
the bridles of the horses, a thousand and six 
hundred stadia. 


15:1 And | saw another sign in heaven, great 
and wondrous, seven angels having the seven 
last plagues; for in them is completed the wrath 
of Aloha. 

? And | saw as a sea of brightness commingled 
with fire; and them who had won-the-victory from 
the beast of prey, and from his image, and from 
the number of his name, standing on the sea of 
brightness, having the harps of Aloha. 

3 And they sang the song of Musha the servant 
of Aloha, and the song of the Lamb, saying, 
Great and wondrous are thy works, LorD God 
Omnipotent; Just and true are thy ways, King of 
ages! 

“Who shall not fear thee, Lorp, And glorify thy 
name? For thou only art [good ] and holy and 
just; Therefore all nations shall come And 
worship before thee; Because thy judgments are 
revealed. 

° After these | saw, and the temple of the 
tabernacle of testimony which is in heaven was 
opened. 

ê And the seven angels came forth, having the 
seven plagues, from the temple, clothed in linen 
pure, resplendent, and girded at their breasts 
with zones of gold. 

7 And one of the four living-ones gave to the 
seven angels SEVEN VIALS of gold, which were 
full of the wrath of Aloha, who liveth for ever and 
ever. 

è And the temple was filled with smoke from the 
glory of Aloha, and from his power. And no man 
was able to enter the temple, until should be 
completed the seven plagues of the seven 
angels. 


16:1 And | heard a great voice [from the temple ] 
saying to the seven angels, Go, and pour forth 
the seven vials of the wrath of Aloha upon the 
earth. 

? And the first went, and poured his vial upon 
the earth: and there became an ulcer, evil and 
painful, upon the men who had the mark of the 
beast of prey, and who worshipped the image of 
him. 


3 And the second angel poured his vial upon the 
sea; and it became blood as of the dead, and 
every living soul died which was in the sea. 

4 And the third angel poured his vial upon the 
rivers, and upon the fountains of waters, and 
they became blood. 

° And | heard the angel of the waters saying, 
Righteous art Thou, who art, And who wast, and 
just; Because thou hast judged these. 

ê For the blood of saints and of prophets have 
they shed, And blood to them hast thou given to 
drink, For they are worthy. 

7 And | heard from the altar [voices] saying, 
Yes, LorD God Almighty! True and just is thy 
judgment. 

è And the fourth poured out his vial upon the 
sun, and it was given to him to scorch men with 
fire; 

? and men were scorched with great heat; and 
men blasphemed the name of Aloha who hath 
power over these plagues; and they repented 
not to give him glory. 

'° And the fifth poured his vial upon the throne 
of the beast of prey; and his kingdom became 
darkness, and they gnawed their tongues from 
pain; 

11 and they blasphemed the God of heaven 
from their pains, and from their ulcers, and 
repented not of their works. 

12 And the sixth poured his vial upon the great 
river Phrat, and his waters were dried, that might 
be prepared the way of the kings who (are) from 
the rising of the sun. 

13 And | saw from the mouth of the dragon, and 
from the mouth of the beast of prey, and from 
the mouth of the false prophet, three unclean 
spirits like frogs. 

14 For they are spirits of demons, working signs; 
they go to the kings of the whole inhabited 
world, to gather them to the battle of the great 
day of Aloha the Omnipotent. 

13 And BEHOLD, | COME, as the thief. Blessed 
is he who watcheth, and keepeth his garments, 
lest naked he walk, and they see his shame. 

16 And they gathered them to a place which is 
called in Hebrew Armagedon. 

17 And the seventh poured his vial upon the air; 
and a great voice went forth from the temple, 
from the throne, saying, IT IS DONE. 

18 And there were lightnings and thunders and 
voices, and a great movement, such as was not 
since men were upon earth, as this movement 
so great. 

19 And the great city became three parts, and 
the city of the nations fell; and Babel the great 


was remembered before Aloha, to give to her 
the cup of the wine of the fury of his wrath. 

2 And every island fled, and the mountains 
were not found. 

2" And great hail, as of a talent (in weight), was 
from heaven upon men; and men blasphemed 
Aloha from the plague of hail, because the 
plague thereof was exceeding great. 


17:1 And one of the seven angels who had the 
seven vials came and spake with me, saying, 
Come; | will show thee the judgment of the great 
harlot, which sitteth upon many waters: 

* with whom the kings of the earth have 
committed fornication, and they who dwell in the 
earth have been made drunk by the wine of her 
fornication. 

? And he led me into the desert, in the spirit; and 
| saw a woman sitting on a beast of prey which 
was red®”’, full of names of blasphemy, (and) 
having seven heads and ten horns. 

“ And the woman was arrayed in purple and 
scarlet®’’, and golden with gold®”” and precious 
stones and pearls; having a cup of gold in her 
hand, full of pollutions and uncleanness of her 
fornications [by which she hath polluted] the 
earth. 

° And upon her forehead the name was written, 
Mystery: Babel the Great, the Mother of Harlots 
and of the Abominations of the Earth. 

ê And I saw the woman drunk with the blood of 
the saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of 
Jeshu; and | wondered, when I saw, with great 
wonder. 

7 And the angel said to me, Why wonderest 
thou? | will tell thee the mystery of the woman, 
and of the beast of prey which beareth her, 
which hath the seven heads and the ten horns. 

è The beast of prey which thou seest, was, and 
is not; and will ascend from the abyss, and go 
into perdition: and they who dwell on the earth 
will admire,---they whose name is not written in 
the book of life from the foundations of the 
world,---while they see the beast of prey, who 
was, and is not, and draweth nigh. 

Here is the mind of him who hath wisdom: The 
seven heads are seven hills where the woman 
sitteth upon them. 

And the kings are seven; five have fallen, one 
is, the other not yet hath come: and when he 
hath come, a little while it behoveth him to abide. 


6 Rev 17:3 - Sumoqo 


Rev 17:4 - Zachurith 
Rev 17:4 - Madhabo b'dhabo 


696 
697 


11 And the beast of prey which was and is not, 

this is an Eighth, and is of the Seven, and is 
unto perdition. 

? And the ten horns which thou sawest are ten 
kings, the men who kingdom not yet have 
received; but authority as kings one hour receive 
with the beast of prey. 

13 They have one will, and their power and their 
authority unto the beast of prey they will give. 

“ They with the Lamb will make war, and the 
Lamb will overcome them; for he is the Lord of 
lords, and the King of kings, and they who are 
with him (are) the called and the chosen and the 
faithful. 

13 And he said to me, The waters which thou 
sawest where the harlot is sitting, are peoples, 
and assemblages, and tongues. 

16 And the ten horns which thou sawest, and the 
beast of prey, will hate the harlot, and make her 
desolate and naked; and her flesh they will eat, 
and herself burn with fire. 

17 For Aloha hath ingiven it to their hands that 
they might do his will, and perform one will to 
give their kingdom to the wild beast, until shall 
be fulfilled the words of Aloha. 

è And the woman which thou sawest is the 
great city which hath kingdom over the kings of 
the earth. 


18:1 After these | saw another angel descending 
from heaven, having great power; and the earth 
brightened with his glory. 

? And he cried with a mighty voice, saying, 
Fallen, fallen hath Babel the Great, and hath 
become a den of demons, and the keep of every 
unclean spirit, and the keep of every unclean 
and abominable bird, and the keep of every 
unclean and abominable beast of prey. 

° For that of the wine of her rage have all 
nations drunk; and the kings of the earth have 
with her committed fornication, and the 
merchants of the earth from the power of her 
luxuriance have become rich. 

And | heard another voice from heaven, 
saying: COME OUT OF HER, MY PEOPLE, that 
you be not partakers of her sins, and lest of her 
plagues you receive. 

For her sins have reached” unto heaven, 
and Aloha hath remembered her iniquity. 

ê Deal with her as she hath dealt with you, and 
double to her according to her works. In the cup 
which she mingled mingle to her double. 

7 How much she hath pleased herself to be 
wanton, all this give her suffering and sorrow. 


68 Rev 18:5 - Lit. adhered 


For she said in her heart, | sit the queen, and am 
not a widow, and sorrow | see not. 

è Therefore in one day will come these her 
plagues, death and sorrow and hunger; and in 
fire she will burn, for mighty is the Lorp God 
who judgeth her. 

? And the kings of the earth who with her have 
committed fornication, and have been wanton, 
shall weep and lament and wail over her, when 
they see the smoke of her burning; 

° standing from far, for fear of her torment, 
saying, Woe, woe, that great city Babel, that 
mighty city! For in one hour hath come thy 
judgment. 

1 And the merchants of the earth shall be 
sorrowful over her, because no man buyeth of 
their burden. 

No more (shall there be in thee) the burden of 
gold, and of silver and of precious stones, and of 
pearls; and of fine linen, and of purple, and of 
silk and scarlet; and of every aromatic wood, 
and every vessel of elephant’s-tooth, and every 
vessel of wood of great price, and of brass and 
of iron and of marble; 

13 and cinnamon and omomun®” and perfumes, 
and ointment and frankincense and wine and oil, 
and fine meal, and wheat, and cattle, and 
slaves, and horses and chariots, and bodies and 
souls of men. 

14 And the fruit of the desire of thy soul hath 
gone from thee, and all those things which are 
delicious and brilliant have perished from thee, 
and the merchants of these things will find them 
no more. 

i They who were made rich by her from afar 
will stand for fear of her torment, and wail and 
be sorrowful, 

16 saying, Woe, woe, that great city, which was 
arrayed in fine linen and purple and scarlet, and 
golded with gold, and (adorned) with precious 
stones and pearls; for in one hour hath been 
destroyed wealth like this. 

7 And every captain and every pilot who 
navigateth to the place, and the mariners, and 
all who serve on the sea, stood from afar, 

18 and cried, while beholding the smoke of her 
burning, saying, What is like to this great city! 

? And they cast dust upon their heads, and 
cried, weeping and lamenting, and saying, Woe, 
woe, that great city, in which were made rich all 
they who have ships in the sea, from the 
preciousness of her! For in one hour she 
becometh desolate! 


6 Rev 18:13 - Spikenard 


*° Rejoice over her, heaven, and the angels and 
apostles and prophets, because Aloha hath 
judged your judgment upon her. 

And an angel took a stone, as a great 
millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus 
with force is cast down Babel the great city, and 
to be found no more. 
®2 And the voice of harpers, and of musicians, 
and of singers, and of trumpeters, shall be heard 
in thee no more. And no artificer, nor art, shall 
more be found in thee. 

?3 And the light of a lamp shall be seen in thee 
no more. And the voice of the bridegroom and of 
the bride shall be heard in thee no more. For thy 
merchants were the great ones of the earth; for 
by thy sorcery were all nations seduced. 

?4 And in her was found the blood of prophets 
and of saints, and of all those who had been 
killed upon the earth. 


19:1 After these | heard a great voice of a 
multitudinous host in heaven, saying, Halleluia! 
Salvation, and power, and glory, and honour, Be 
unto our God. 

For true and righteous are his judgments; 
Because he hath judged the great harlot Who 
corrupted the earth with her fornication, And 
hath avenged the blood of his servants at her 
hand. 

3 And the second time they said, Halleluia! And 
her smoke went up for ever and ever. 

* And the four-and-twenty presbyters fell, and 
the four living-ones, and worshipped Aloha who 
sitteth upon the throne, saying, Amen, Halleluia! 
° And a voice came forth from the throne, 
saying, Praise our God, all his servants, And 
they who fear him, small and great. 

ê And | heard as the voice of a great host, as 
the voice of many waters, as the voice of mighty 
thunders, saying, Halleluia, For the Lorp our 
God the Omnipotent reigneth! 

7 Let us rejoice and exult and give glory unto 
him; Because the marriage feast of the Lamb 
hath come, And his bride hath made herself 
ready. 

è And it was given to her to be arrayed in fine 
linen, resplendent and pure; for the fine linen is 
the righteousness of saints. 

And he said to me, Write, Blessed are they 
who to the supper of the marriage feast of the 
Lamb are called. And he said to me, These my 
words are the true sayings of Aloha. 

10 And | fell before his feet to worship; and he 
said to me, See (that thou do it) not; thy 
fellow servant (am I), and of thy brethren who 


have the testimony of Jeshu. Aloha worship; for 
the testimony of Jeshu is the spirit of prophecy. 

1! And | saw heaven opened. And behold a 
white horse, and he who sat upon him was 
called the Faithful and the True; and in 
righteousness he judgeth and maketh war. 

"* But his eyes were as the flame of fire, and 
upon his head were many diadems, having 
names written; and the name which was written 
of him no man knoweth but himself. 

13 And he was arrayed in a vestment sprinkled 
with blood, and his name was called The Word 
of Aloha. 

14 And the armies of heaven followed him upon 
white horses, clothed in garments of fine linen, 
pure (and) white. 

° And from his mouth went forth a sharp sword 
of two edges, that therewith he might smite the 
nations. And he will rule the nations with a rod of 
iron, and he will tread the winepress of the 
fierceness of the wrath of Aloha the Omnipotent. 

16 And he had upon his vestment and upon his 
thigh the name written, King of kings, and Lord 
of lords. 

17 And | saw an angel standing in the sun. And 
he cried with a great voice, saying to all the 
fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, Come, 
gather to the great supper of Aloha; 

18 that ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the 
flesh of chiefs of thousands, and the flesh of 
heroes, and the flesh of horses and them who sit 
upon them, and the flesh of all the sons of liberty 
and of the slaves, and of the small and of the 
great. 

19 And | saw the beast of prey, and the kings of 
the earth, and their armies, gathered together to 
make war with him who sat on the throne, and 
with his armies. 

20 And the beast of prey was taken, and the 
false prophet with him who wrought signs before 
him, with which he deluded them who received 
the signature of the beast of prey, and them who 
worshipped his image; and living they were both 
cast into the lake of fire which burneth with 
sulphur. 

21 And the rest were slain with the sword of him 
who sat upon the horse; with that (sword) which 
went forth from his mouth. And all the fowls were 
satiated with their flesh. 


20:1 And | saw an angel descending from 
heaven, having the key of the abyss, and a great 
chain in his hand. 

? And he laid hold of the dragon, that ancient 
serpent, who is the deceiver, and Satana, who 


seduced all the habitable world, and bound him 
a thousand years; 

3 and cast him into the abyss, and shut and 
sealed over him, that he should no more seduce 
the nations, until the thousand years be 
completed: but after them he will be loosed a 
little time. 

* And | saw thrones, and they sat upon them, 
and judgment was given to them; and to the 
souls of them who had been cut asunder for the 
sake of the testimony of Jeshu, and for the word 
of Aloha, and them who had not worshipped the 
beast of prey nor his image, nor received his 
signature upon heir forehead and upon their 
hands. And they lived and reigned with their 
Meshiha the thousand years. 

° This is the first resurrection. 

ê Blessed and holy is he who hath part in the 
first resurrection: upon them the second death 
hath not power; but they shall be priests of 
Aloha and of his Meshiha, and shall reign with 
him the thousand years. 

7 And when the thousand years shall be fulfilled, 
Satana will be loosed from the place of his 
keeping, 

è and will go forth and seduce the nations which 
are in the four corners of the earth, Gug and 
Mogug, to gather them to war, of whom the 
number is as the sand of the sea. 

* And they went up on the breadth of the earth, 
and surrounded the camp of the saints, and the 
beloved city; and fire descended from Aloha 
from heaven, and devoured them. 

10 And the accuser who seduced them was cast 
into the lake of fire and of sulphur, as was also 
the beast of prey and the false prophet; and they 
will be tormented day and night for ever and 
ever. 

11 And | saw a great white throne, and Him who 
sat thereon, from whom from his face fled earth 
and heaven; and place (as) to this was not found 
for them. 

12 And | saw the dead, great and small, standing 
before the throne; and the books were opened; 
and another book was opened, which is (the 
Book) of Life. And the dead were judged from 
the (records) which are written in the books 
according to their works. 

And the sea gave up the dead which were in 
it, and death and shiul gave up the dead which 
were in them. And they were judged every one 
according to their works. 

14 And death and shiul were cast into the lake of 
fire, which is the second death. 

15 And if a man was not found written in the 
Book of Life, he was cast into the lake of fire. 


21:1 And | saw new heavens and a new earth: 
for the first heaven and the first earth had gone, 
and the sea was no more. 

? And the holy city, Urishlem the new, | saw 
descending from heaven from Aloha, prepared 
as the bride is decked for her husband. 

3 And I heard a great voice from heaven, 
saying, Behold, the tabernacle of Aloha is with 
men; and he will dwell with them, and they shall 
be his people; and Aloha himself will be with 
them, and will be their God. 

And every tear shall be wiped away from their 
eyes, and death shall be no more; nor sorrow, 
nor clamour, nor pain, shall be any more; for the 
former things are passed away. 

° And He who sat upon the throne said, Behold, 
| make all things new. And he said, Write: for 
these are the faithful and true words of Aloha. 

ê And he said to me, | am Olaph and Thau, the 
Beginning and the End. To him who thirsteth | 
will give of the water of life freely. 

He who overcometh shall inherit these; and | 
will be to him Aloha, and he shall be my son. 

è But the fearful, and the faithless, and sinners, 
and the unclean, and murderers, and 
fornicators, and sorcerers, and servers of idols, 
and all liars, (shall have) their portion in the lake 
which burneth with fire and sulphur; which is the 
second death. 

? And one of the seven angels who had the 
seven vials full of the seven last plagues, came 
and spake with me. Saying, Come, | will show 
thee the bride, the wife of the Lamb. 

10 And he led me in spirit upon a great and high 
mountain, and showed me the holy city 
Urishlem, descending from heaven from Aloha; 

" having the glory of Aloha, as the clearness of 
light, like a stone of great price, as the stone 
Jaspon, resembling crystallos; 

having a wall great and high, which had 
twelve gates, and names written upon them, 
which are the names of the twelve tribes of the 
sons of Israel. 

On the east three gates, and on the north 
three gates, and on the south three gates, and 
on the west three gates. 

14 And the wall of the city had twelve 
foundations; and upon them the twelve names of 
the twelve apostles of the Lamb. 

15 And he who talked with me had a measure, a 
rod of gold, that he might measure the city and 
the gates and the walls thereof. 

16 And the city was set four-square, and the 
length of it was as the breadth: and he 
measured the city with the rod, upon twelve 


stadia of twelve thousand. And the length and 
the breadth and the height of it are equal. 

17 And he measured the wall of it, an hundred 
and forty and four measures of the cubits of a 
man, that is, of the angel. 

18 And the structure of the wall of it is (of) jaspis, 
and the city is of pure gold, like pure brightness. 
19 And the foundations of the wall of the city 
were adorned with every precious stone: the first 
foundation was of jaspis, the second sathphiros, 
the third caledon, the fourth zmoragdo, 

20 the fifth sardonicos, the sixth sardion, the 
seventh crisuthilos, the eighth berulla, the ninth 
topadion, the tenth chrosoposius, the eleventh 
hyacinthos, the twelfth amuthistos. 

=" And the twelve gates are twelve pearls, each 
of every one of the gates (a pearl), and each of 
every one of the pearls (a gate). And the wide 
street of the city was of pure gold as the 
brightness of light. 

*? And a temple | saw not in it; for the Lorb, the 
Omnipotent, is the temple thereof and the Lamb. 
?3 And the city hath no need of the sun nor of 
the moon to enlighten it; for the glory of Aloha 
illuminateth it, and the light thereof is the Lamb. 
24 And the nations of the saved walk by the light 
of it, and the kings of the earth bring their glory 
and the honour of the nations into it. 

?5 And the gates of it shall not be shut by day, 
for night is not there. 

28 And they shall bring the glory and honour of 
the nations into it; 

?7 and nothing shall enter into it that defileth, nor 
that worketh uncleanness; but they who are 
written in the book of life of the Lamb. 


22:1 And he showed me a river of waters of life, 
clear as crystal, coming forth from the throne of 
Aloha and of the Lamb. 

? In the midst of the wide street of it, and by the 
river, here and there, (was) the tree of life, which 
produced twelve fruits, in every month giving 
each one its fruit. And the leaves of the tree 
(are) for the healing of the nations. 

And there shall be no more falling away’”°: 
and the throne of Aloha and of the Lamb shall 
be in it, and his servants shall serve him. 

* And they shall see his face, and his name 
shall be upon their foreheads. 

° And night shall be no more: nor any need 
have they of the light of a lamp, or the light of 
the sun; for the Lord God enlighteneth them, 
and they will reign for ever and ever. 


7 Rey 22:3 - Nethro 


ê And he said to me, These sayings are 
faithfulness and truth. And the Lorp God of the 
spirit of the prophets hath sent me, his angel, to 
show to his servants the things which must soon 
be done. 

7 And behold, | come quickly. Blessed is he who 
keepeth the words of the prophecy of this 
book". 

2 And also | Juhanon am he who heard and saw 
these. And when | had heard and seen, | fell to 
worship before the feet of the angel who showed 
them to me. 

? And he said to me, See (that thou do it) not. | 
am thy fellow-servant, and of thy brethren the 
prophets, and of them who keep the words of 
this book. Worship Aloha. 

10 And he said to me, Seal not the words of the 
prophecy of this book; for the time draweth nigh. 

11 He who doeth evil shall work evil still; and he 
who is filthy shall be filthy still; and the righteous 
shall still do righteousness, and the holy be holy 
still. 

1? Behold, | come quickly; and my reward is with 
me, to render to every one according as is his 
work. 

13 | am Olaph and Thau, the First and the Last, 
the Beginning and the End. 

14 Blessed are they who do his commandments, 
that they may have authority to the tree of life, 
and by the gates may enter into the city. 

15 Without are dogs, and sorcerers, and 
fornicators, and murderers, and servers of idols, 
and every one who loveth and maketh a lie. 

16 | JESHU have sent mine angel to testify unto 
you these things before the churches. | am the 
root and the offspring of Dawid, as the bright, 
the morning star. 

17 AND THE SPIRIT AND THE BRIDE SAY, 
COME! AND HE WHO HEARETH SHALL SAY, 
COME! AND HE WHO THIRSTETH MAY 
COME, AND HE WHO WILLETH, TO TAKE 
THE WATERS OF LIFE FREELY. 

8 | testify to every one who heareth the words 
of the prophecy of this book, That if any man 
shall set upon them, Aloha will set upon him the 
plagues which are written in this book. 

And if any man make to cease from the 
words of the book of this prophecy, Aloha will 
make to cease his portion of the tree of life, and 
of the holy city of which is written in this book. 

2 He who testifieth these saith, Yes: | come 
quickly. Amen. Come, Lorb Jeshu. 

The grace of our Lord Jeshu Meshiha be with 
all the saints. Amen. 


7°? Rey 22:7 - Polyglot, "Of this prophecy" 


Author 


ETHERIDGE, John Wesley, English nonconformist clergyman: b. near Newport, Isle of Wight, 
24 Feb. 1804; d. Camborne, 24 May 1866. He was educated by his father and later acquired a 
thorough knowledge of Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Syriac, German and French. In 1826 he 
attempted to enter the ministry and after a period of probation was received in full connection at 
the conference of 1831. Thereafter he spent two years at Brighton, when he removed to 
Cornwall. In 1838 his health began to fail and he was pensioned and went to live at Caen and 
Paris. His health improving, he accepted the pastorship of a Methodist church at Boulogne in 
1842. Four years later he returned to his native land and was successively on the circuits of 
Islington, Bristol, Leeds, Penzance, Penryn, Truro and Saint Austell in Cornwall. Heidelberg 
conferred on him the degree of Ph.D. He published (The Apostolic Ministry and the Question of 
Its Restoration Considered) (1836) ; (Misericordia, or Contemplations of the Mercy of God) 
(1842): (Horae Aramaicae) (1843); (The Syrian Churches: Their Early History, Liturgies and 
Literature) (1846) (The Apostolical Acts and Epistles from the Peschitto, or Ancient Syriac, to 
which are Added the Remaining Epistles and Book of Revelation from a later Syriac Text) 
(1849); (The Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan ben Uzziel on the Pentateuch, with the 
Fragments of the Jerusalem Targum) (2 vols., 1863); (Life of Rev. Adam Clarke) (1858). 
Consult memoir by T. Smith (London 1871). 


