i  . 

::::>     1:::      ill: 

ik 

iMMUiiWtM 

ttflnrTnmTT' 

BS112 


(1»1HTII»linH|''tf|l1MI.'tTr]'^;t^]7mfWI'»trm^ma.lL. 


■HI 


mw 


//^  ^ff'/  ?)v'-.  A'  /i.  7r.  .^ 


1 

LIBRARY                   1 

T  h  eo 

logical     Seminary, 

PRINCETON,     N.    J. 

j     C'l-'^f 

Civision..t$.  J.  A  V  Sv. . 

j     Shij 

Section.. j/Qw^ 

IhoL 

\2>3.\ 

THE 


IE¥     TESTAMENT 


TRANSLATED  FROM 


THE  SYRIAC  PESHITO  VERSION. 


Dag'.'    hyM..\rpiilr>,rt,j> 


T.n^  hv  T.  S I'uiuifrjKi 


^^^Ye^-U-    /iC^^^-n.^     ^Cr>-t-o^-     .  ^^^ti,^,      /cPS/, 


\.       V~.V^<1^.    >i 


THE 


IE¥  TESTAMENT; 


OR, 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  HOLY  GOSPEL 


OF  OUR  LORD  AND  OUR  GOD, 


JESUS  THE  MESSIAH. 


51  literal  ^rimslatinn  fraiii  Wji  lijriE  ^Mfik  ^rrsinn. 


BY  JAMES  MURDOCK,  D.D. 


NEW    YOEK: 
PUBLISHED    BY    STANFORD    AND    SWORDS, 

NO.    137    BROADWAY. 

1851. 


Entered,  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  One  Thousand 
Eight  Hundred  and  Fifty-one, 

By    JAMES    M  U  R  D  O  C  K,  D.  D., 

In  the  Clerk's  Office  of  the  District  Court  of  the  United  States  for  the  District  of  Connecticnt. 


BTERZOTrPKD    DT 

BILI.IN  Jt  BROTHERS, 

10  NORTU  WILI.IAU-STKIIIT,  K.  T. 

M'GOWN,  miHTSB.  ahw-stbsxt. 


PREFACE 


To  extend  his  own  long  cherished  but  scanty  Icnowledge  of  the  Syriac 
language,  the  writer  commeuced  reading  the  Peshito  Syriac  New  Testa- 
ment in  January,  1845,  and  at  every  step  he  found  increasing  delight. 
The  artless  simplicity,  directness,  and  transparency  of  the  style, — the 
propriety  and  beauty  of  the  conceptions  of  Christ  and  his  followers,  as 
expressed  in  a  Shemitish  dialect  very  nearly  identical  with  their  vernacular 
tongue, — the  pleasing  thought  that  the  words  were,  probably,  in  great  part, 
the  very  terms  which  the  Saviour  and  his  Apostles  actually  uttered  in  their 
discourses  and  conversations, — and  especially  the  full  comprehension  which 
the  Syriac  translator  seemed  to  have  of  the  force  and  meaning  of  the 
inspired  original,  served  to  chain  attention  and  hold  the  mind  spell-bound 
to  the  book.  Such  exquisite  pleasure  the  writer  longed  to  have  others 
share  with  him ;  but  as  few  persons,  even  among  the  clergy,  have  either 
leisure  or  facilities  for  acquiring  the  Syriac  language,  he  soon  came  to  the 
conclusion,  that  he  could  do  nothing  better  than  first  read  the  book  care- 
fully through,  and  then  give  a  literal  and  exact  translation  of  it.  Accord- 
ingly he  furnished  himself  with  several  of  the  best  editions  of  the  book, 
and  the  best  Syriac  Lexicons  and  Grammars,  and  commenced  his  transla- 
tion early  in  August,  1845,  and  completed  it  on  the  IGth  of  June,  1846. 
Tliis  is  briefly  the  history  of  the  work  here  presented  to  the  public. 


VI  PREFACE. 


The  Syriac  text  followed  in  the  first  part  of  this  translation,  was  that 
of  the  beautiful  edition  printed  by  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society, 
London,  1816,  4to.,  whieli  was  prepared  for  the  press,  as  far  as  the  Acts  of 
the  Apostles,  by  the  late  Rev.  Claudius  Buchanan,  D.D.,  Author  of 
"  Christian  Researches,"  "  Star  in  the  East,"  &c.,  and  the  remainder  by  the 
Rev.  Samuel  Lee,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Arabic  in  the  University  of 
Cambridge,  England.  The  latter  part  of  the  translation  was  made  from 
the  second  edition  of  the  same  Bible  Society,  London,  1826,  4to. ;  but  the 
text  of  Leusden  and  Schaafs  edition,  Leyden,  1717,  was  everywhere 
consulted,  and  much  use  was  made  of  their  Latin  translation  of  it.  The 
pocket  edition  of  Gutbir,  Hamburgh,  1664,  12mo.,  was  also  generally  con- 
sulted. The  Lexicons  constantly  used  throughout,  were  the  Lexicon 
Syriacum  Concordantiale  in  Nov.  Testamentum  of  Charles  Schaaf,  Leyden, 
1717,  4to. ;  the  Lexicon  Syriacum  of  Edmund  Castell,  revised  and 
enlarged  by  J,  D.  Michaelis,  Gottingen,  1788,  4to. ;  and  the  small  Lex- 
icon Syriacum  in  Nov.  Testamentum  of  Giles  Gutbir,  bound  up  with  his 
Syriac  New  Testament.  The  Grammars  relied  upon  were,  the  elaborate 
Grammaticoe  Syriacae  Libri  iii.  of  Andr.  Theoph.  Hoffmann,  Philos.  et 
Theol,  Doctor,  Halle,  1827,  4to. ;  and  the  Elementarlehre  der  syrischen 
Sprachc,  by  Prof  Fred.  Uhlemann,  Berlin,  1829,  8vo. 

In  this  translation,  the  Books  of  the  New  Testament  are  divided  into 
Paragraphs,  accordmg  to  the  sense ;  just  as  in  Campbell's  translation  of 
the  Four  Gospels,  and  in  the  Greek  Testaments  of  Bengel,  Gricsbach, 
Knapp,  and  others.  The  common  divisions  into  Chapters  and  Verses  arc 
noted  in  the  margin,  and  the  Verses  are  also  put  in  parentheses  in  the 
middle  of  the  lines.  For  the  benefit  of  those  who  have  some  knowledge 
of  the  Syriac  language,  the  more  important  words  are  frequently  placed  in 
the  side  margin,  with  references  to  the  corresponding  words  in  the  transla- 
tion. Deviations  of  the  Syriac  text  from  the  Greek,  and  also  the  suscep- 
tibilities of  the  Syriac  words,  or  phrases,  of  a  diflTerent  rendering  from  that 


PREFACE.  vii 


in  the  text,  are  likewise  indicated  in  the  side  margin.     The  foot  margin  is 
reserved  for  occasional  comments  and  critical  observations. 
The  principles  adopted  in  this  translation,  were  : 

(1)  To  translate,  as  literally  as  possible,  in  consistence  with  idiomatic 
and  perspicuous  English. 

(2)  To  use  Saxon  phraseology  in  preference  to  Latin,  as  better  accord- 
ing with  the  spirit  of  the  Peshito  original. 

(3)  To  adopt  the  obsolescent  and  solemn  style  of  the  English  Bible, 
e.  g.  tJiou  speakest,  he  speaketh,  ye  speak,  instead  of  you  speak,  he  speaks, 
&c.,  as  more  seemly  for  this  holy  Book. 

(4)  To  write  the  proper  names  of  persons  and  places,  wliich  are  men- 
tioned in  the  Old  Testament,  as  they  are  written  in  our  English  Old 
Testament ;  and  those  which  occur  only  in  the  New  Testament,  as  they 
are  written  in  our  English  New  Testament.  This  is  the  rule  adopted  by 
Dr.  Campbell  in  his  translation  of  the  Four  Gospels.  Yet  (j^  »  « ^n 
{Meshihha)  has  been  translated  Messiah,  and  not  Christ ;  and  ^ClLLcl» 
[Shemun)  has  been  translated  Simon,  and  not  Peter. 

(5)  In  general,  to  avoid  using  technical  theological  terms,  when  good 
substitutes  could  be  found,  in  order  to  call  away  attention  from  the  word 
to  the  thing :  thus  |js*-»^j»  (an  A])ostle)  is  rendered  Legate ;  and 
|.J.ajs.k1d  (^Saviour)  is  rendered  Vivifier,  as  being  more  literal,  for  the  verb 
|juK»  (especially  in  the  Conjug.  Aphel,  w»_k»1)  properly  signifies  to  make 
alive,  to  vivify ;  and  its  derivatives  ^_»Ji_k»  and  ()  i  kk!sD  properly  signify 
life,  and  life-giver,  or  vivifier.  These  are  the  usual  terms  of  the  Syriac 
version,  denoting  that  salvation  which  Christ  bestows  on  fallen  men,  who 
are  represented  as  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sin."  The  terms  pOO^ 
{liberator,  deliverer)  and  |j_o5a2)  {deliverance)  are  indeed  sometimes 
used  of  this  salvation,  but  less  frequently. — Yet  there  is  one  family  of 
Syriac  technicals,  which  have  been  rendered  by  the  English  technicals  for 
the  same  ideas,  to  the  neglect  of  their  primary  meaning.     They  are  ^C\\ 


viii  PREFACE. 

(properly,  intransitive,  to  stand  iip,  to  stand  Jirm,)  which  is  translated,  to  be 
baptized: — i^nv")  (literally,  transitive,  to  cause  another  to  stand,  to 
establish),  translated,  to  baptize : — p,V)N^r)  (an  establisher,  one  who  makes 
others  to  sfitud),  translated,  a  baj^tizer  : — and  ]Aj5Qin2ilD  (a  standing  up)), 
translated,  baptism. 

(G)  To  translate  idiomatic  phrases  not  fully  naturalized  in  the  English 
language,  by  equivalent  English  phrases,  and  not  to  transfer  them  in  their 
foreign  costume.  Thus,  ]^;0\oj  {a  feeder  on  detraction),  an  epithet  of 
Satan,  is  translated  a  calumniator : — |^£:)|\s*~^  {lord  of  enmity)  is 
translated  an  enemy: — |AjL£i  «^5  [inajor-donms)  is  rendered,  a  steward : 
— ]ZoAx£:i  L'^y  [mastership  of  the  house)  is  rendered  stezoa,rdship : — 
|£5|lli  .'"im^n  {accejytiny  faces)  is  I'endered,  having  respect  of  p)ersons,  or 
partialit//  : — (^jui  .» *^ro  1  {assumers  of  faces)  is  rendered  hypocrites  : — 
X^OJ  %  a  ^^O  {letting  out  breath),  apologizing,  or  defending  one''s  self : 
and  (j.j05  Z^^^i^  {holding  the  breath),  being  patient,  or  long  suffering  : — 
l^li)  ;j05  {living  cnvay  from  roofs,  roaming  in  fields)  are  lunatics.  So  also 
many  compounds  of  \S:i,  a  son,  and  of  Aa^,  a  house  or  home,  are  para- 
phrased;  e.  g.  son  of  his  city,  rendered,  his  fellow-citizen: — son  of  my 
yoke,  rendered,  my  yoke-fellow,  or  colleague: — son  of  forty  years,  rendered, 
forty  years  old: — son  of  their  trade,  rendered,  one  of  their  occupation: — 
SOM  0/ a  7rta»,  rendered,  a  man: — sons  of  men,  rendered  men;  &c.  And 
house  of  {lie  prisoners,  translated,  a  prison : — house  {home)  of  the  dead, 
translated,  a  grave,  or  sepulchre : — house  of  gatherings,  translated,  a  ^arwer, 
or  store-house : — house  of  the  publicans,  translated,  a  custom  house: — house 
{home)  of  olives,  translated,  «m  olive  yard: — house  {home)  of  the  eyes, 
translated,  the  forehead;  &c. 

When  the  translator  had  finished  his  work,  he  supposed  that  he  had 
produced  the  only  English  translation  of  the  New  Testament  ever  made 
from  the  Peshito ;  hut  after  ahout  three  months,  the  London  press  issued 
a  book,  entitled,  "A  Literal  Translation  of  the  Four  Gospels  from  the 


PREFACE.  ix 


Peshito,  by  J.  W.  Etheridge ;"  and  announced,  as  in  preparation,  by  the 
same  author,  "The  Apostolical  Acts  and  Epistles,  from  the  Peshito." 
The  Gospels  of  Mr.  Etheridge  were  speedily  procured ;  but,  on  comparing 
them  with  this  version,  the  plan  and  aims  of  Mr.  Etheridge  were  found  to 
be  so  diverse  from  his  o^\^^,  that  the  translator  had  no  hesitation  in  going 
forward  with  his  work.  Accordingly,  he  continued  to  revise  and  correct 
it ;  and,  for  the  sake  of  improving  it,  as  he  found  opportunity,  he  pursued 
the  study  of  the  Syriac  language  and  literature,  for  more  than  four  years. 
The  result  he  now  presents  to  the  Cliristian  public,  hoping  it  may  prove 
both  interesting  and  useful  to  all  such  as  are  anxious  to  perfect  themselves 
in  the  knowledge  of  the  holy  Scriptures  of  the  New  Testament. 

JAMES  MURDOCK. 

New-Haven,  July  23,  1851. 


The  Holy  Gospel,  the  Announcement  of  Matthew  the  Legate. 


I. 


The  book  of  the  nativity^  of  Jesus  the  Messiah, 
the  son  of  David,  son  of  Abraham. 

2  Abraham  begat  Isaac :  Isaac  begat  Jacob :  Jacob 

3  begat  Judah  and  his  brothers:  (3)  Judah  begat 
Pharez  and  Zara  of  Taraar:  Pharez  begat  Ilezron: 

4  Hezron  begat  Ram:  (-I)  Ram  begat  Aminadab: 
Aminadab   begat  Nahshon :    Nahsiion  begat  Sal- 

5  mon :    (5)  Sahrion   begat   Boaz  of  Rahab :    Boaz 

6  begat  Obed  of  Ruth :  Obed  begat  Jesse :  (6)  Jesse 
begat  David  the  king :   David  begat  Solomon  of 

7  the  wife  of  Uriah  :  (7)  Solomon  begat  Rehoboam : 

8  Rehoboam  begat  Abia :  Abia  begat  Asa :  (8)  Asa 
begat   Jchoshaphat :    Jehoshaphat    begat    Joram : 

9  Joram  begat  Uzziah :  (9)  Uzziah  begat  Jotham : 
Jotham  begat  Ahaz:  Ahaz  begat  liezekiah:  (10) 
Hezekiah  begat  Manasseh :  Manasseh  begat  Amon : 
Amon  begat  Josiah :  (11)  Josiah  begat  Jeconiah 
and   his  brothers,   in  the  captivity  of  Babylon.'' 

12  (12)  And  after  the  captivity  of  Babylon,  Jeconiah 

13  begat  Salathiel :  Salathiel  begat  Zcrubbabel :  (13) 
Zerabbabel  begat  Abiud:  Abiud  begat  Eliakim: 

1-4  Eliakim   beo:at   Azor :    (14)  Azor   begat   Zadok : 


10 


11 


15  Zadok  begat  Achim : 
Eliud   beo;at    Eleazar 

16  Matthan  begat  Jacob 
the  husband  of  Mary, 


Achim  begat  Eliud:  (15) 
Eleazar  begat  Matthan : 
(16)  Jacob  begat  Joseph, 
of  whom  was  born  Jesus 


17  who  is  called  the  Messiah. <=  (17)  All  the  genera- 
tions, therefore,  are,  from  Abraham  to  David 
fourteen  generations,  and  from  David  to  the  cap- 
tivity of  Babylon  fourteen  generations,  and  from 
the  captivity  of  Babylon  to  the  Messiah  fourteen 

generations. 
1 


MATTHEW,    II. 


'Sy-loOlljlD 


«  Sy.  ^c 
root  yd"', 
Iliph.  y^d-n 
salvavil. 

'  Sy.  CLM-t-,^ 
Gr.  tflia":"). 

s  Sy. 


Sy.  »CDjOJCn 

Sy.  ^  ' 


'Sy. 


or,  ie  shepJierd 
of. 


And  the  birtli  of  Jesus  the  Messiah  was  thus.  18 
While  his  mother  ^Nfarj  was  betrothed  to  Joseph, 
before  they  had  cohabited,  she  was  found  to  be 
witli  child  by  the  Holy  Spirit.     (19)  And  Joseph  19 
her  husband  was  a  righteous'^  man,  and  unwilling 
to  expose   her:    and  he  thought  of  putting  her 
away  privately.     (20)  And  while  he  contemplated  20 
these  things,  an  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  to  him 
in   a   dream,  and   said  to   him :    Joseph,  son   of 
David^  fear  not  to  take  Mary  thy  wife;  for  that 
which  is  conceived  in  her,  is  from  the  Holy  Spirit: 
(21)  and  she  will  bear  a  son;  and  thou  shalt  call  21 
his  name  Jesus,^  for  he  will  resascitate^  his  people 
from  their  sins.     (22)  Now  all  this  that  occurred,  22 
was  to  fulfill  what  was  spoken  of  the  Lord  by  the 
prophet:  (23)  Behold,  a  virgin  will  conceive,  and  23 
will   bear   a  son,  and  thou  shalt  call   his  name 
Emmanuel, ff  which  is  interpreted,  Our  God  with 
us.     (24)  And  when  Joseph  rose  from  his  sleep,  21 
he  did  as  the  angel  of  the  Lord  commanded  him, 
and  took  his  wife.     (25)  And  he  knew  her  not,  25 
until  she  had  borne  her  firstborn  son,  and  called 
his  name  Jesus. 

Now  when  Jesus  was  born   in  Bethlehem  of  II. 
Judiva,  in  the  days  of  Herod-^  the  king,  there  came 
MagiiJ  from  the  east  unto  Jerusalem,  (2)  saying:     2 
Where  is  the  king  of  the  Jews  that  is  born  ?     For 
we  liave  seen  his  star  in  the  east,  and  have  come 
to  worship  him.     (3)  And  Herod  the  king  heard,     3 
and   he  was  disturbed ;    and  all  Jerusalem  with 
him.     (-1)  And  he  assembled  all  the  chiefs  of  the     4 
])riests'=  and  the  scribes  of  the  people,  and  inquired 
of  them,  AVhcre  is  the  birth})lace  of  the  Messiah  ? 
(5)  And  they  said :  In  Bethlehem  of  Judiea ;  for    o 
thus  it  is  written  in  the  prophet:  (0)  Thou  also,     G 
licthlohcm  of  Judaea,  art  not  the  little  among  the 
kings  of  Judica,  for  a  king  shall  come  from  thee 
who  shall  rule'i  my  people  Israel.    (7)  Then  Uerod     7 
privately  called  the  Magi,  and  learned  from  them 
at  what  time  the  star  ai)peared  to  them.     (8)  And     8 
he  sent  them  to  Bethlehem,  and  said  to  them.  Go, 
search  diligently  for  the  child;  and  when  ye  have 
found  him,  come  and  tell  me,  that  I  also  may  go 
and  worship  him.     (9)  And  they,  Avhcn  they  had     9 
heard  from  the  king,  went  forward:   and  lo,  the 


MATTHEW,    II. 


star  they  liad  seen  in  the  east  went  before  them, 
until  it  came  and  stood  over  where  the  child  was. 

10  (10)  And  when  they  saw  the  star,  they  rejoiced 

11  much,  with  great  joy.  (11)  And  they  entered  tlie 
house ;  and  they  saw  the  child,  with  Mary  his 
mother ;  and  they  fell  down  and  worshipped  him : 
and  they  opened  their  treasures,  and  presented  to 

12  him  gifts,  gold,  and  myrrh,  and  frankincense.  (12) 
And  it  was  shown  them  in  a  dream,  that  they 
should  not  return  to  Herod.  And  hj  another 
way,  they  returned  to  their  country. 

13  And  when  they  were  gone,  an  angel  of  the  Lord 
appeared  to  Joseph  in  a  dream,  and  said  to  him. 
Arise,  take  the  child  and  his  mother,  and  flee  into 
Egypt ;  and  be  thou  there,  until  I  tell  thee :  for 

14  Herod  will  seek  for  the  child,  to  destroy  it.  (14) 
Then  Joseph  arose,  took  the  child  and  his  mother, 

15  by  night,  and  fled  to  Egypt.  (15)  And  he  was 
there,  until  the  death  of  Herod ;  that  so  might  be 
fulfilled  that  which  was  spoken  of  the  Lord  by  the 
prophet,   saying.   From  Egypt  have  I  called  my 

16  son.  (16)  Then  Herod,  when  he  saw  that  he  had 
been  deluded  by  the  Magi,  Avas  very  angry.  And 
he  sent  and  slew  all  the  children  in  Bethlehem, 
and  in  all  its  confines,  from  a  child  of  two  years 
and   under,   according   to   the  time   that    he  had 

17  carefully  learned  from  the  Magi.  (17)  Then  was 
that  fulfilled,  Avhich  was  spoken  by  Jeremiah  the 

18  prophet,  saying:  (18)  A  voice  was  heard  in  Rama, 
weeping  and  great  lamentation ;  Rachel  bemoaning 
her  children,  and  unwilling  to  be  comforted,  be- 

19  cause  they  are  no  more.  (19)  But  Avhen  king 
Herod  was  dead,  an  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared 

20  in  a  dream  to  Joseph  in  Egypt,  (20)  and  said  to 
him :  Arise,  take  the  child  and  his  mother,  and  go 
into  the  land  of  Israel ;   for  they  are  dead  Avho 

21  sought  the  life  of  the  child.  (21)  And  Joseph 
arose,   and   took  the  child  and   his  mother,  and 

22  went  to  the  land  of  Israel.  (22)  But  when  he 
heard  that  Archelaus  was  king  in  Juda?a,  instead 
of  his  father  Herod,  he  feared  to  go  thither.  And 
it  was  revealed  to  him  in  a  dream,  that  he  should 

23  go  into  the  land  of  Gahlee.e  (23)  And  he  came 
and  dwelt  in  a  city  that  is  called  Nazareth  :*"  that 
so  might  be  fulfilled  that  which  was  said  by  the 
prophet,  that  he  should  bo  called  a  Nazarene.s 


<=  Sy.  ]J^ 

^Sy.Z5^      ' 

f  Sy.  ]_.5y, 
an  adjective 
from  the  pre- 
cediiifj. 


MATTHEW,    III. 


•  Sy. 


Sy.  ]^-r£i 
Sy.  "tJLoOjl 


"=  1.  0.  so  common 
lift:  leaches  vs. 


'  or,  ynaheth. 
So  also  tlic 
otlicr  verbs. 

f  i.  o.  fire  suffer- 
ed to  burn  on 
and  consume 
what  is  in  it. 

•>  Sy.  1Iqj|- 


G 


And   in   those   days   came  John'i  the   Bapti-  III 
zer>     And  he  proclaimed  in  the  desert  of  Judica, 
(2)  and  said:  lle})ent;  the  kingdom  of  heaven  hath     2 
approached.    (8)  For  this  is  lie  of  whom  it  was  said,     'i 
by  Isaiah  the  prophet:  The  voice  of  one  crying  in 
the  wilderne.-^s,  Pre})are  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord, 
make  smooth  his  paths.     (4)  And  as  to  this  John,     'J 
his  raiment  was  of  camel's  hair,  and  a  girdle  of 
skin  was  upon  liis  loins;  and  his  food  was  locusts 
and    wild    honey.      (5)    Then    went    out    to   him     c 
Jerusalein,    and   all  Juda3a,    and  all   the   country 
about  the  Jordan.     (H)  And  they  were  baptized 
by  him  in  the  river  Jordan,  while  they  confessed 
their  sins.     (7)  But  when    he  saw  many  of  the     7 
Phari.sees'^  and  of  the  Sadducees,'^  who  came  to  be 
baptized,  he  said  to  them :   Generation  of  vipers, 
wlio  hath  taught  you  to  flee  from  the  wrath  that 
cometh  ?     (8)  Bring  forth  the  fruits  therefore,  that     8 
accord  Avith  repentance.     (9)  And  do  not  think,     9 
and  say  within  j^ourselves,  that  Abraham  is  our 
father :  for  I  say  to  you,  that  God  is  able  of  these 
stones  to  raise  up  children  to  Abraham.    (10)  And  10 
lo,  the  ax  is  put  to  the  root  of  trees.^     Every  tree, 
therefore,  which  beareth  not  good  fruit,  is  felled, 
and  falleth   into  the  fire.     (11)  I   indeed  baptize  11 
you   with   water   unto   repentance ;    but   he   that 
cometh  after  me  is  more  ])owerful  than  I;  whose 
sandals  I  am  not  worthy  to  carry.    He  will  baptize 
you  with  the  Holy  Spirit  and  with  fire.     (12)  His 
winnowing   shovel   is  in   his  hand ;    and  he  will 
make^  clean   his   threshing-floor.     The  wheat  he 
will  gather  into  his  storehouse;  and  the  chaff  he 
will  burn  with  fire  not  extinguished.? 

Then  came  Jesus  from  Galilee  to  the  Jordan 
unto  John,  to  be  baptized  by  him.  (14)  But  John  14 
refused  him ;  and  said,  I  need  to  be  baptized  by 
thee,  and  hast  thou  come  to  me?  (15)  And  Jesus 
answered,  and  said  to  him:  Allow  it  now,  for  thus 
it  bccometh  us  to  fulfill  all  righteousness.''  Then 
he  permitted  him.  (IG)  And  when  Jesus  was 
baptized,  he  went  up  immediately  from  the  water. 
And  heaven  was  opened  to  him  ;  and  he  saw  the 
Holy  Spirit  descending  like  a  dove,  and  it  came 
upon  him.  (17)  And  lo,  a  voice  from  heaven,  17 
which  said :  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I 
have  delight 


12 


13 


15 


IG 


MATTHEW,    IV. 


6 


8 


9 


TV.  Then  was  Jesus  led  by  the  Holy  Spirit  into 
the  desert,  to  be   tempted  by   the  Calumniator. '^ 

2  (2)  And  he  fasted  forty  days  and  forty  nights,  and 

o  afterward  he  hungered.  (3)  And  the  Tempter 
came,   and  said  to  him:   If  thou  art  the  Son  of 

4  God,  command  these  stones  to  become  bread.  (4) 
But  he  replied,  and  said:  It  is  written,  that  not  by 
bread  only,  doth  man  live ;    but  by  every  word 

6  proceeding  from  the  mouth  of  God.  (5)  Then  the 
Calumniator  took  him  to  the  holy  city,  and  set 
him  on  a  pinnacle  of  the  temple,  (6)  and  said  to 
him:  If  thou  art  the  Son  of  God,  cast  thyself 
down :  for  it  is  written,  that  he  will  give  his 
angels  charge  of  thee,  and  in  their  hands  will  they 
sustain  thee,  lest  thou  strike  thy  foot  against  a 
stone.  (7)  Jesus  saicf  to  him :  It  is  moreover 
written,  that  thou  shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy 
God.  (8)  Again  the  Calumniator  took  him  to  a 
mountain  that  was  very  high,  and  showed  him  all 
the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and  their  glory  ;  (9) 
and  said  to  him:  All  these  will  I  give  thee,  if  thou 

10  wilt  fall  down  and  worship  me.  (10)  Then  Jesus 
said  to  him  :  Begone,  Satan  ;b  for  it  is  written,  that 
thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord,  thy  God ;  and  him 

11  only  shalt  thou  serve.  (11)  Then  the  Calumniator 
left  him:  and  lo,  angels  came,  and  ministered  to 
him. 

12  And   when   Jesus   had    heard   that   John   was 

13  delivered  up,  he  retired  to  Galilee.  (13)  And  he 
left  Nazareth,  and  came  and  dwelt  in  Capernaum, '^ 
by  the  side  of  the  sea,  on  the  confines  of  Zebulon 

14  and  Naphthali.  (14)  That  so  might  be  fulfilled  that 
which  was  spoken  by  Isaiah  the  prophet,  who  said: 

15  (15)  The  land  of  Zebulon,  the  land  of  Naphthali, 
the  way  of  the  sea,  the  ford  of  Jordan,  Galilee  of 
the  Gentiles ;  (16)  the  people  that  sat  in  darkness, 
have  seen  great  light ;  and  to  them  who  sat  in  the 
region  and  shadow  of  death,  light  is  arisen. 

From  that  time  began  Jesus  to  proclaim  and 
say :  Eepent ;  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  hath 
IS  approached.  (18)  And  as  he  walked  on  the  shore 
of  the  sea  of  Galilee,  he  saw  two  brothers,  Simon^ 
called  Cephas, e  and  Andrew^  his  brother,  who  were 
casting  nets  into  the  sea ;  for  they  were  fishermen. 

19  (19)  And  Jesus  said  to  them:  Follow  me;  and  I 

20  will  cause  you  to  become  fishers  of  men.    (20)  And 


»  an  appellation 
of  Satan. 


Sy.  "Ijl^ 


16 


1 


"  Sy. 


J  Sy.  ^v<^« 
e  Sy.  \£:i]d 
f  Sy.  »CDol5rj] 


MATTHEW,    V. 


E  Sy. 

>•  Sy.  ^^^1 
'  Sy.  ,_L>jQ_. 
^  or,  ?/,'as  heard. 
'  Sy.  ]_i5CLCD 

"•  Sy.  ]jcLj, 
fr.  1q_.>, 

«  demon. 

"or,  roamers, 
the  houseless, 
or,  swcA  as 
ro/7m  in  the 
fields. 

"or,  i/(e  /or«i  of. 


Sy.  *_K»0;^ 


''  or,  tJie  laiul. 


or,  u-orJ. 


Sy.  salted. 
Sy.  goes  f  jr. 

Sy.^nNs 


immediately,  they  left  their  nets,  and  went  after  him. 
(21)  And  as  he  passed  on  from  there,  he  saw  two  21 
other  brothers,  James?  the  son  of  Zebedee,^  and 
John'  his  brother,  in  a  ship  with  Zebedee  their 
iather,  who  were  mending  their  nets.  And  Jesus 
called  them.  (22)  And  they  immediately  left  the  22 
ship  and  their  father,  and  went  after  him. 

And  Jesus  travelled  over  all  Galilee :  and  he  23 
taught  in  their  synagogues,  and   proclaimed  the 
tidings  of   the   kingdom ;    and   he   cured   every 
disease  and  malady  among  the  people.     (24)  And  2-4 
his  fame  spread^  through  all  Syria.'     And   they 
brouglit   to   him   all   them   that    were   very   sick 
with  diverse  diseases,  and  them  that  were  afflicted 
with   pains,  and   demoniacs,™  and  lunatics, «  and 
paralytics;  and  he  healed  them.     (25)  And  there  25 
followed  him  great  multitudes  from  Galilee,  and 
from  the  Ten  Cities,  and  from  Jerusalem,  and  from 
Judiea,  and  from  beyond"  the  Jordan. 

And  when  Jesus  saw  the  multitudes,  he  ascend-  V. 
ed  a  hill ;  and  when  he  was  seated,  his  disciples 
drew  near  him:    (2)  and  he  opened  his  mouth,  and     2 
taught  them,  and  said:   (3)  Blessed  are  the  poor     3 
in  spirit:''-  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  theirs! 
(4)  Blessed  are  the  mourners :   for  they  shall  be     4 
comforted !     (5)  Blessed  are  the  meek :  for  they     5 
shall  inherit  the  earth  I^     (6)  Blessed  are  they  that     6 
hunger  and  thirst  for  righteousness :  for  they  shall 
be  satiated !     (7)  Blessed  are  the  merciful :  for  on     7 
them  shall  be  mercies !     (8)  Blessed  are  the  clean     8 
in  heart :  for  they  shall  behold  God !     (9)  Blessed     9 
are  the  cultivators  ^^f  peace :   for  they  shall   be 
called  sons  of  God!     (10)  Blessed  are  they  that  10 
are  persecuted  on  account  of  righteousness :   for 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  theirs !     (11)   Blessed  11 
are  ye,  when  they  revile  3'ou  and  persecute  you, 
and  speak  every  evil  thing'=  against  you,  falsely, 
on  my  account,     (12)  At  that  time,  rejoice  and  be  12 
glad :  for  your  reward  in  heaven  is  great.     For  so 
they  pcr.secutcd  the  prophets  that  were  before  you. 

Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth  !     But  if  the  salt  13 
become  insipid,  with  what  shall  it  he  seasoned  ?d 
It  is  fit*^  ibr  nothing ;  but  to  be  thrown  out,  and  be 
trodden  under  foot  by  men.     (14)  Ye  arc  the  light  14 
of  the  world  If    A  city  built  upou  a  hill,  cannot 


MATTHEW,    V. 


15  be  concealed.  (15)  And  thej  do  not  light  a  lamp 
and  place  it  under  a  bushel  ;&  but  upon  a  light- 
stand,  and  it  giveth  light  to  all  that  are  in  the 

16  house.  (16)  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men, 
that  they  may  see  j^our  good  works,  and  may 
glorify  your  Father  who  is  in  heaven. 

17  Do  not  suppose  that  I  have  come  to  subvert  the 
laWj'^  or  the  prophets:  [I  have  come]  not  to  sub- 

18  vert,  but  to  fulfill.  (18)  For  verily  I  say  to  you, 
that  until  heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  one 
iota  or  one  letter'  shall  not  pass  from  the  law, 

19  until  all  shall  be  fulfilled.  (19)  Therefore,  who- 
ever shall  break  one  of  these  small  commands,  and 
shall  so  inculcate  on  the  children  of  men,  shall  be 
called  little  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven :  but  every 
one  that  shall  do  and  teach  [them],  shall  be  called 

20  great  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  (20)  For  I  say 
to  you,  that  unless  your  righteousness  shall  abound 
more  than  that  of  the  Scribes'^  and  Pharisees, •  ye 
shall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

21  Ye  have  heard  that  it  was  said  to  the  ancients. 
Thou  shalt  not  kill :  and  every  one  that  killeth,  is 

22  obnoxious  to  judgment.  (22)  But  I  say  to  you. 
That  every  one  who  is  angry  with  his  brother 
rashly,'"  is  obnoxious  to  judgment :  and  every  one 
that  saitli  to  his  brother,  Raka!"  is  obnoxious  to 
the  council :»  and  every  one  that  shall  say.  Fool  !p 

23  is  obnoxious  to  hell''-fire.  (2o)  If  therefore  thou 
shalt  bring  thy  oblation  to  the  altar,  and  shalt 
there  remember  that  thy  brother  hath  any  offence® 

21:  against  thee,  (21)  leave  there  thy  oblation  before 
the  altar,  and  go  first  and  be  reconciled  with  thy 
brother;  and  then  come  and  present  thy  oblation. 

25  (25)  Be  at  agreement  with  thy  prosecutor,  forth- 
with, and  while  on  the  way  with  him ;  lest  the 
prosecutor  deliver  thee  up  to  the  judge,  and  the 
judge  deliver  thee  over  to  the  sheriff, *  and  thou 

26  fall  into  the  house  of  prisoners.  (26)  Verily  I  say 
to  thee,  Thou  Avilt  not  come  out  from  there  until 
thou  hast  paid  the  last  farthing.^ 

27  Ye  have  heard  that  it  hath  been  said.  Thou  shalt 

28  not  commit  adultery.  (28)  But  I  say  to  you,  That 
whoever  gazeth  on  a  woman  with  concupiscence,  at 
once  committeth  adultery  with  her  in  his  heart. 

29  (29)  If  therefore  thy  right  eye  make  thee  offend, 
pluck  it  out,  and  cast  it  from  thee ;  because  it  is 


'  Sy.  U^CD 
Heb.  nj^D 


''  Sy.  ]gnnV)i 
■  Sy.  Urffi 


^  Sy.  "j/g^m 
Sy. '|.«_,^ 

^  Sy.  Irul 

Sy.  ^25 

Sy. 

Sy.  P\ 
'  Sy.  pCTL^ 

'  Sy.  ]Ad1 

'Sy.U-L^ 

"  Sy.  jjolo* 


Sy.  profitable. 
Sy.  and  not. 

Sy.  ]jai-t 


Sy.  U-.Zao, 

Gr.  p(iTulva. 
Sy.  Uo^^iO 


Sy. 


better^  for  thee  that  th}'  one  member  perish;  than^ 
that  thy  whole  body  fall  into  hell.y  (30)  And  if  30 
thy  right  hand  make  thee  offend,  cut  it  off,  and 
cast  it  from  thee ;  because  it  is  better  for  thee  that 
one  of  thy  members  perish,  than  that  thy  whole 
body  fall  into  hell. 

It  hath  been  said,  That  if  a  man  will  put  away  his  31 
wife,  he  must  give  her  a  writing  of  divorcement. 
(32)  But  I  say  to  you,  That  Avhoever  putteth  away  32 
his    wife,    except  for   the    offence   of  whoredom, 
causcth   her   to   commit   adultery :    and   he   that 
taketh  the  divorced  woman,  committeth  adultery. 

Again,  ye  have  heard  that  it  hath  been  said  to  33 
the  ancients,  Thou  shalt  not  be  false  in  thy  oaths ; 
but  thou  shalt  perform  thine  oaths  to  the  Lord, 
(34)  But  I  say  to  you,  Swear  not  at  all :   not  by  34 
heaven,  for  it  is  the  thi'one  of  God :  (35)  and  not  35 
by  the  earth,  for  it  is  the  footstool  under  his  feet : 
and  likewise  not  by  Jerusalem,  for  it  is  the  city 
of  the  great  king.     (36)  Moreover,  thou  shalt  not  36 
swear  by  thy  head,  for  thou  canst  not  make  one 
hair  in  it  either  black  or  white.     (37)  But  let.your  37 
language  be.  Yes,  yes ;  or  No,  no ;  for  whatever  is 
beyond  these  proceedeth  from  evil. 

Ye  have  heard  that  it  hath  been  said :  An  eye  38 
for  an  eye,  and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth.    (39)  But  I  say  39 
to  you :  Kesist  not  evil ;  but  if  a  person  smite  thee 
on  thy  right  cheek,  turn  to  him  the  other  also. 

(40)  And  if  one  is  disposed  to  sue  thee  and  get  40 
away  thy  coat,^  relinquish  to  him  also  thy  cloak.^ 

(41)  Whoever  compcllcth  thee  to  go  one  mile,  go  41 
with  him  two.     (42)  Whoever  demandeth  of  thee,  42 
give  to  him:  and  whoever  wisheth  to  borrow  of 
tlicc,  deny  him  not. 

Ye  have  heard  that  it  hath  been  said :  Thou  43 
shalt  love  thy  neighbor,  and  hate  thy  enemy. ^ 
(44)  But  I  say  to  you :  Love  your  enemies ;  and  44 
bless  him  that  curseth  you;  and  do  good  to  him 
that  hateth  you ;  and  pray  for  them  that  lead  you 
in  bonds,  and  that  persecute  you :  (45)  that  ye 
may  be  the  children  of  your  Father  that  is  in 
heaven,  who  causeth  his  sun  to  rise  upon  the  good 
and  upon  the  bad,  and  sendeth  his  rain  upon  the 
righteous  and  upon  the  unrighteous.  (46)  For,  if 
yc  love  them  that  love  you,  what  reward  have  ye? 
Do  not  even  the  publicans  do  this  ?     (47)  And  if  47 


45 


46 


MATTHEW,    VI. 


ye  salute  3'onr  brethren  only,  Avhat  do  ye  tbat  is 
not  common?     Do  not  even   publicans  do  this? 
48  (48)  Be  ye  therefore  perfect ;  even  as  your  Father 
who  is  in  heaven  is  perfect. 

VI.  Be  cautious  in  your  alms-giving,  not  to  perform 
it  befoi'e  men,  so  that  ye  may  be  seen  of  them : 
otherwise,   ye  have  no  reward  from  your  Father 

2  who  is  in  heaven.  (2)  Therefore,  when  thou 
doest  alms  thou  shalt  not  sound  a  trumpet^^  before 
thee,  as  the  hypocrites  do  in  the  synagogues  and 
in  the  streets,  that  they  may  get  praise  from  men. 
Verily  I  say  to  you,  They  have  gotten  their  re- 

3  ward.  (3)  But  thou,  Avhen  doing  alms,  let  not 
thy  left  hand  know  what  thy  rigTit  hand  doeth : 

4  (4)  that  thy  alms  ma}^  be  in  secret.  And  thy 
Father,  who  seetli  in  secret,  will  reward  thee 
openl}-. 

5  And  when  thou  prayest,  thou  shalt  not  be  like 
the  hypocrites,  wdio  are  fond  of  standing  up  in 
the  synagogues  and  at  the  corners  of  streets  to 
pray,  so  that  they  may  be  seen  by  people.^  Verily 
I  say  to   you,   They   have   gotten   their  reward. 

6  (6)  But  thou,  when  thou  prayest,  enter  into  thy 
closet  and  close  the  door,  and  pray  to  thy  Father 
who  is  in  secret;  and  thy  Father,  who  seeth  in 

7  secret,  will  reward  thee  openly.  (7)  And  when  ye 
pray,  be  not  garrulous*^  like  the  heathen ;  for  they 
expect  to  be  heard  for  their  abundance  of  words. 

8  (8)  Therefore,  be  not  like  them ;  for  your  Father 
knoweth  what  is  needful  for  you,  before  ye  ask 

9  him.d  (9)  In  this  manner,  therefore,  pray  ye : 
Our  Father  who  art  in  heaven,  hallowed  be  thy 

10  name :    (10)   Thy  kingdom   come :    Thy  will^  be 

11  done;  as  in  heaven,  so  on  earth:     (11)  Give  us 

12  our  needful  bread,  this  day :  (12)  And  forgive  us 

13  our  debts,  as  w^e  forgive  our  debtors :  (13)  And 
bring  us  not  into  temptation,  but  deliver  us  from 
evil:    For  thine  is  the  kingdom,  and  the  power,*" 

14  and  the  glorj^,  for  ever  and  ever:??  Amen.  (14)  For 
if  ye  forgive  men  their  faults,  your  Father  who  is 

15  in  heaven  will  also  forgive  you.  (15)  But  if  ye 
shall  not  forgive  men,  your  Father  also  forgiveth 
not  you  your  faults. 

16  And  when  ye  fast,  be  not  sad  like  the  hypocrites. 
For  they  distort  their  faces,  that  they  may  be  seen 


Sy.  a  horn. 


*>  Sy.  the  sons  of 
men. 


■=  Sy. 

''  or,  ii. 

®  or,  2)leasure. 

f  or,  might. 
s  S}-.  y}\s\ 


10 


MATTHEW,    VI. 


■■  or,  light. 
'  or,  simple. 


•^  Sy.  lords. 
'  Sy.  ]joV)Vo 


"■  or,  and. 

"  or,  superior  lo. 


°  or,  the  wild 
lilies. 

P  Sy,  clothed. 


'  Sy.  Y'n^ny 
•  Sy.  ]^r)\s 


of  men  to  fast.     Verily  I  say  to  you,  tliey  have 
gotten  their  reward.     (17)  But,  when  thou  fastest,  17 
wash  thou  thy  face,  and  anoint  thy  head :   (18)  that  18 
thou  mayest  not  be  seen  by  men  as  a  faster,  but  by 
thy  Fatlier  who  is  in  secret :  and  thy  Father  who 
seeth  in  secret,  will  recompense  thee. 

Lay  not  up  for  yourselves  treasures  on  the  earth,  19 
where  moth  and  rust  spoil,  and  where  thieves  dig 
through  and  steal.    (20)  But  lay  up  for  yourselves  20 
treasures  in  heaven,  where  no  moth  and  no  rust 
can  spoil,  and  no  thieves  dig  through  nor  steal. 
(21)  For  where  your  treasure  is,  there  will  your  21 
heart  also  be. 

The  lamp'i  of  the  body  is  the  eye.     If  therefore  22 
thy  eye  shall  be  sound,'  thy  whole  body  Avill  be 
luminous.     (2o)  But  if  thy  eye  shall  be  diseased,  23 
thy  whole   body  will  be  dark.     If  then  the  light 
that  is  in  thee  be  darkness,  how  great  will  be  thy 
darkness ! 

No  man  can  serve  two  masters  :^  for  either  he  2-1 
will  hate  the  one  and  love  the  other,  or  he  will 
honor  the  one  and  neglect  the  other.     Ye  cannot 
serve  God  and  mammon. ^    (25)  Therefore  I  say  to  25 
you:  Be  not   anxious   about  your  life,  what  ye 
shall  eat,  and  what  ye  shall  drink ;  nor  about  your 
body,  how  ye  shall  clothe  yourselves.     Is  not  the 
life  more  important  than  food,  and  the  body  than 
raiment?   (26)  Look  at  the  birds  of  heaven ;  which  26 
sow  not,  and  reap  not,  and  gather  not  into  store- 
houses, but">  your  Father  who  is  in  heaven  feedeth 
them.      Are  not  ye  more  important"  than  they? 
(27)  And  who  of  you  that  shall  be  anxious,  can  add  27 
to  his  stature  a  cubit?     (28)  And  about  raiment,  28 
why  are  ye  anxious?     Consider  the  lilies  of  the 
desert,"  in  what  manner  they  grow.     They  toil 
not ;  and  they  spin  not.    (29)  Yet  I  say  to  you,  that  29 
not  even  Solomon  in  all  his  glory,  was  arrayedp 
like  one  of  them.     (80)  And  if  God  so  clothe  the  SO 
grass  of  the   field,   which   exists   to-da}'-,   and  to- 
morrow falls  into  the  oven,  will  he  not  much  more 
[clothe]  you,  ye  small  in  faith?     (31)  Therefore  31 
be  not  anxious;  nor  say.  What  shall  we  eat,  or 
wliat  shall  we  drink,  or  wherewith  be  clothed  ? 
(32)  For,  all  these  things  the  people  of  the  world^  32 
.seelv  after.     And  your  Father,  who  is  in  heaven, 
knowcth  that  all  these  things  are  needful  to  you. 


MATTHEW,    VII. 


11 


33  (33)  But  seek  ye  first  tlie  kingdom  of  God,  and 
his  righteousness :    and  all  these  things  shall  be 

34  added  to  you.  (34)  Therefore  be  not  anxious 
about  the  morrow :  for  the  morrow  hath  its  own 
anxieties.     Sufficient  for  the  day,  is  its  own  evil. 

YII.    Judge  not,  that  ye  be  not  judged,     (2)  For  with 

2  the  judgment  that  ye  judge,  ye  shall  be  judged; 
and  by  the  measure  that  ye  measure,   shall  it  be 

3  measured  to  you.  (3)  And  why  observest  thou 
the  straw  in  thy  brotlier's  eye,  and  regardest  not 

4  the  beam  that  is  in  thine  own  eye  ?  (4)  Or  how 
canst  thou  say  to  thy  brother.  Allow  me  to  pluck 
the  straw  from  thy  eye  ;  and  lo !  a  beam  is  in  thy 

5  own  eye.  (5)  Thou  hypocrite ;  pluck  first  the 
beam  from  thy  own  eye ;  and  then  thou  wilt  see 
clearly,  to  pluck  the  straw  out  of  thy  brother's 
eye._ 

6  Give  not  a  holy  thing  to  dogs:  and  cast  not 
your  pearls  before  swine ;  lest  they  tread  them 
under  their  feet,  and  turn  and  lacerate  you. 

7  Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  to  you :  seek,  and  ye 
shall  find  :  knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  to  you. 

8  (8)  For,  every  one  that  asketh,  receiveth :  and  he 
that  seeketh,  findeth :  and  to  him  that  knocketh, 
it  shall  be  opened.  (9)  For  what  man  is  there 
among  you,  of  whom  if  his  son  ask  bread,  will  he 
reach  him  a  stone?  (10)  Or  if  he  ask  of  him  a 
fish,  will  he  reach  him  a  serpent?  (11)  If  ye 
then,  who  are  evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts 
to  your  children,  how  much  more  will  your  Father 
who  is  in  heaven  give  good  things  to  them  that 
ask  him? 

Whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to 
you ;  so  also  do  ye  to  them :  for  this  is  the  law^*- 
and  the  prophets.  (13)  Enter  ye  in  by  the  strait 
gate;  for  wide  is  the  gate  and  broad  the  way 
which  leadeth  to  destruction  ;b  and  many  are  they 
that  walk  in  it.  (14)  How  small  the  gate  and 
straitened  the  way  that  leadeth  to  life,  and  few 
they  who  find  it ! 

Beware  of  fiilse  prophets;  who  come  to  you  in 
the  garb  of  sheep,  but  internally  they  are  rapacious 
wolves.  (16)  And  from  their  fruits  ye  shall  know 
them.  Do  men  gather  grajies  from  thorn  bushes ; 
or  figs  from   thistles?     (17)  So  every  good  tree 


9 

10 
11 


12 


14 


15 
16 


17 


Sy.  "jmnVni^ 
from  the  CJr. 
vo/xoj. 

Sy.  ^J^l 


12 


MATTHEW,    VIII. 


<=  Sy.falleth. 

^  or,  pleasure. 

e  Sy.  fjl^ 

'  Sy.  ]^.A>^ 


E  or,  strcmns, 
rivers. 

^  Sy.  l^o'i 


'  or,  the  fall. 


^  or,  doctrine. 


Sy.  rn  /Jjai 

hour. 

Sy. 

Sy.  ni  //ic 
house. 


beareth  good  fruits;  but  a  bad  tree  beareth  bad 
fruits.     (18)  A  good  tree  cannot  bear  bad  fruits;  18 
nor  can  a  bad  tree  bear  good  fruits.     (19)  Every  19 
tree  that  beareth  not  good  fruits,  is  cut  down  and 
consigned'^  to  the  fire.     (20)  Wherefore,  by  their  20 
fruits  3'e  shall  know  them. 

Not  wlioever   may  say   to   me,   My  Lord,  my  21 
Lord,  will  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven:  but 
he  that  doeth  the  willf^  of  my  Father  who  is  in 
heaven.     (22)  Many  will  say  to  me  in  that  day,  22 
My  Lord,  m}^  Lord,  have  we  not  prophesied  in  thy 
name?  and  in  thy  name  cast  out  demons?*^  and 
in  thy   name   wrought   man}'    works^  of  power? 
(23)  And  then  will  I  declare  to  them;   I  never  23 
knew  you.     Depart  from  me,  ye  doers  of  evil. 

Every  one  therefore  that  heareth  these  my  dis-  24 
courses,  and  doeth  them,  will  be  like  to  a  wise 
man,    one    that    built    his    house   upon   a   rock. 
(25)   And   the   rain   descended,    and   the   floods?  25 
came,  and  the  winds''  blew;  and  they  rushed  upon 
that  house ;  and  it  fell  not,  for  its  foundations  were 
laid  upon  a  rock.     (26)  And  every  one  that  hear-  26 
eth  these  my  discourses,  and  doeth  them  not,  will 
be  like  a  foolish  man  that  built  his  house  upon 
sand.    (27)  And  the  rain  descended,  and  the  floods  27 
came,  and  the  winds  blew ;  and  they  rushed  upon 
that  house,  and  it  fell ;  and  great  was  the  ruin' 
of  it. 

And  so  it  was,  that  Avhen  Jesus  had  ended  these  28 
discourses,  the  multitudes  were  astonished  at  his 


teaching :'«  (29) 
authority ;  and 


for  he  taught  them  as  one  having 
not  as  their  Scribes  and  Pharisees. 


29 


And  as   he  descended  from  the   mountain,  VIIL 
great  multitudes  gathered  around  him.    (2)  And  be-     2 
hold,  a  leper  came  and  worshipped  him,  and  said : 
My  Lord,  if  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  make  me  clean.   (3)     3 
And  Jesus  stretched  forth  his  hand,  touched  him, 
and  said :  I  will :  be  thou  clean.     And  immediate- 
ly^ his  leprosy  was  cleansed.     (-4)  And  Jesus  said     4 
to  him,  See,  thou  tell  no  man :  but  go,  show  thy- 
self to   the  priests,  and   present   an   oblation^  as 
Moses  enjoined,  for  a  testimony  to  them. 

And  when  Jesus  had  entered  into  Capernaum,  5 
a  centurion  came  to  him,  and  liesought  him,  (6)  6 
and  said:  My  Lord,  my  cliild  lieth  at  home,'"'  and 


MATTHEW,    VIII. 


13 


7  is  paralytic,  and  badly  afflicted.     (7)  Jesus  said  to 

8  liim,  I  will  come  and  heal  him.  (8)  The  centurion 
replied,  and  said :  My  Lord,  I  am  not  worthy  that 
thou  shoaldst  come  under  my  roof:  but  speak,  the 

9  word  only,  and  my  child  will  be  healed.  (9)  For 
I  also  am  a  man  under  authority,  and  there  are 
soldiers  under  my  hands,  and  I  say  to  this  one, 
Go,  and  he  goeth;  and  to  another,  Come,  and  he 
cometh ;  and  to  my  servant.  Do  this  thing,  and  he 

10  doetli  [it].  (10)  And  when  Jesus  heard  [this],  he 
admired  [it] ;  and  he  said  to  those  walking  with 
liim,  Verily  I  say  to  you,  I  have  not  found  faith 

11  like  this  even  in  Israel.  (11)  And  I  say  to  you, 
that  many  shall  come  from  the  east,  and  from  the 
Avest,  and  shall  recline  wdth  Abraham  and   Isaac 

12  and  Jacob,  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  (12)  but 
the  children  of  the  kingdom  shall  go  forth  into 
the  outer  darkness.     There  will  be  weeping  and 

13  gnashing  of  teeth.  (13)  And  Jesus  said  to  the 
centurion,  Go ;  be  it  to  thee  as  thou  hast  believed. 
And  his  child  was  cured  in  that  same  hour. 

11  And  JesLis  came  to  the  house  of  Simon, 'i  and 
saw  his  Avife's   mother   prostrate,   confined   by    a 

15  fever.  (15)  And  he  touched  her  hand,  and  the 
fever  left  her:  and  she   arose  and  ministered  to 

IG  them.  (16)  And  when  it  was  evening,  they 
brought  many  demoniacs  before  him ;  and  he  ex- 
pelled their  demons  by  a  word,   and   healed  all 

17  them  that  were  diseased:  (17)  that  so  might  be 
fulfilled  that  which  was  spoken  by  Isaiah  the 
prophet,  wdio  said :  He  will  bear  our  sorrows,  and 
our  infirmities  he  will  take  upon  him. 

18  And  when  Jesus  saw  great  multitudes  around 
him,  he  ordered  that  they  should  go  to  the  oppo- 

19  site  sliore.e  (19)  And  a  Scribe  came  and  said  to 
him :    Eabbi,^  I   will    follow  thee   to    the   place 

20  whither  thou  goest.  (20)  Jesus  said  to  him,  For 
foxes  there  are  holes,  and  for  the  birds  of  heaven 
there  are  nests ;  but  for  the  Son  of  man,  there  is 

21  not  where  he  may  recline  his  head.  (21)  And 
another  of  his  disciples  said  to  him:    My  Lord, 

22  suffer  me  first  to  go  and  bury  my  father.  (22)  But 
Jesus  said  to  him :  Follow  thou  me,  and  leave  the 
dead  to  bury  their  dead. 

23  And  when  Jesus  entered  the  ship,  his  disciples 

24  embarked  with  him.     (24)  And  lo,  a  great  com- 


i.  e.  Simon 
Peter. 


Sy.  the  other 
side,  i.  e.  of 
the  lake. 


Sy. 


u 


MATTHEW,    IX. 


Sy.  "tJQ_i> 

Sy.  place  of 
iXraves. 


k  Sy./eZZ. 
'  Sy.  died. 


►Sy.  the  eas)j. 


motion  arose  in  tlie  sea,  so  that  the  vessel  was 
covered   by  the  waves.      But  Jesus  was   asleep : 

(25)  and  his  disciples  came  to  awake  him,  and  said  25 
to  him:  Our  Lord,  deliver  us;  we  are  perishing! 

(26)  Jesus  said  to  them,  Why  are  ye  afraid,  ye  26 
small  in  faith !     Then  he  arose,  and  rebuked  the 
wind  and  the  sea;  and  there  was  great  tranquillitv. 

(27)  And  the  men  were  amazed ;  and  they  said,  27 
What  a  man  is  this,  to  whom  the  winds  and  the 
sea  are  obedient ! 

And  when  Jesus  arrived  at  the  farther  shore,  in  28 
the  country  of  the  Gadarenes,^  there  met  him  tAvo 
demoniacs, h  who  came  out  from  the  sepulchres,' 
very  furious,  so  that  no  one  could  pass  that  way. 

(29)  And  they  cried  out,  and  said:  What  have  we  29 
to  do  with  thee  ?  Jesus,  thou  Son  of  God.     Hast 
thou  come  hither  before  the  time  to  torment  us  ? 

(30)  And  at  a  distance  from  them  there  was  a  herd  30 
of  many  swine  feeding.     (31)   And  the  demons  31 
entreated  of  him,  and  said :  If  thou  cast  us  out, 
suffer  us  to  go  into  the  herd  of  swine.     (32)  And  32 
Jesus  said  to  them,  Go  ye.    And  immediately  they 
came  out,  and  entered  into  the  SAvine;  and  that 
whole  herd  ran  straight  to  a  precipice,  and  plunged^ 
into  the  sea,  and   perished^  in  the  waters.      (33)  33 
And  the  herdsmen  fled,  and  entered  the  city,  and 
related  all  that  had  occurred,  and  concerning  the  . 
demoniacs.     (34)   And  all  the  city  came  out  to  3-i 
meet  Jesus:   and  when  they  saw  him,  they  be- 
sought him  to  retire  from  their  coasts. 

And  he  entered  the  ship,  and  passed  over  and  IX. 
came  to  his  own  city.     (2)  And  they  brought  to     2 
him  a  paralytic,  lying  on  a  bed.     And  Jesus  saw 
their  faith,  and  said  to  the  paralytic:  Take  cour- 
age, my  son;  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee.    (3)  And     3 
some  of  the  Scribes  said  in  their  minds,  This  man 
blasphemeth,     (4)  But  Jesus  knew  their  thoughts :     4 
and  he  said  to  them.  Why  do  ye  think  evil  [things] 
in  your  heart?     (5)  For,  which  is  the  easier, '"^  to     5 
say.  Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee;  or  to  say.  Arise 
and  walk?     (6)  But  that  ye  may  know  that  the     6 
Son  of  man  hath  authority  on  earth  to  forgive 
sins,  he  said  to  the  paralytic:  Arise,  take  up  thy 
bed,  and  go  to  thy  home.     (7)  And  he  arose  and     7 
went  to  his  home.     (8)  And  Avlien  the  multitudes     8 


MATTHEW,    IX. 


15 


saw  [it],  they  were  struck  witli  awe;  and  they 
praised  God,  who  had  given  authority  like  this  to 
men, 
9  And  as  Jesus  passed  on  from  there,  he  saw  a 
man  sitting  at  the  custom-house,  whose  name  was 
Matthew,  b     And  he  said  to  him.  Follow  me :  and 

10  he  arose  and  followed  him.  (10)  And  as  they 
were  reclining  in  a  house,  many  publicans  and 
sinners  came  and  reclined  with  Jesus  and  his  dis- 

11  ciples.  (11)  And  when  the  Pharisees  saw  [it], 
they  said  to  his  disciples.  Why  doth  3'our  Rabbi<"- 

12  eat  with  publicans  and  sinners?  (12)  And  as 
Jesus  heard  [it],  he  said  to  them :  They  who  are 
in  health  have  no  need  of  a  physician,  but  they 

13  that  are  very  sick.  (13)  Go  and  learn  what  that 
is :  I  require  compassion,  and  not  a  sacrifice !  For 
I  did  not  come  to  call  the  righteous,  but  the  sinful. 

11  Then  came  to  him  the  disciples  of  John,<i  and 
said:  Why  do  we  and  the  Pharisees  fast  much, 

15  and  thy  disciples  fast  not?  (15)  Jesus  said  to 
them :  Can  the  children^  of  the  nuptial  chamber 
fast,  so  long  as  the  bridegroom  is  with  them?  But 
the  days  will  come  when  the  bridegroom  will  be 

16  taken  from  them,  and  then  they  will  fast.  (IG)  No 
one  inserteth  a  piece  of  new  cloth  on  an  old  gar- 
ment;   lest  that  which  fillcth  up,  tear  from  that 

17  garment,  and  the  rent  become  greater.  (17)  And 
they  do  not  put  new  wine  into  old  sacks ;  lest  the 
sacks  burst,  and  the  wine  run  out,  and  the  sacks 
perish.  But  they  put  new  wine  into  new  sacks; 
and  they  are  both  preserved. 

18  And  while  he  was  thus  discoursing  with  them, 
a  certain  ruler^  came,  drew  near,  worshipped  him, 
and  said :  My  daughter  is  already  dead,  but  come, 

19  lay  thy  hand  upon  her,  and  she  will  live,  (li)) 
And  Jesus  rose  up,  and  his  disciples;   and  they 

20  followed  him.  (20)  And  behold,  a  woman  whose 
blood  had  flowed  fourteen  years,  came  up  behind 

21  him,  and  touched  the  extremity  of  his  robe :  (21) 
for  she  had  said  in  her  mind,  If  I  but  touch  his 

22  garment  I  shall  be  cured.  (22)  And  Jesus  turned 
himself,  looked  at  her,  and  said  to  her:  Take 
courage,  my  daughter;  thy  faith  hath  given  thee 
life.?     And  the  woman  was  cured  from  that  very 

23  hour.  (23)  And  Jesus  came  to  the  house  of  the 
ruler:    and  he  saw  there  pipers,  and  multitudes 


Sy.  ^Alo 


Sy.  ^QjQ^J 


Sy.  ,_JLkjQ_, 


or,  guests. 


Sy.  IjoDJI, 
Gr.  apywv. 


e  Sy.  hath  vivi- 
fied thee. 


16 


MATTHEW,    X. 


Sy.  "Icu: 


•=  Sy.  |j. 


A 


d  .Sy. 


making  outcry.    (24)  And  he  said  to  them :  Retire ;  24 
for  the  maid  is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth.     And  they 
scoffed  at  him.     (25)  And  when  he  had  ejected  25 
the  throngs,  he  entered  in,  and  took  her  by  the 
hand,  and  the  maid  rose  up.     (2G)  And  the  fame  26 
of  this  [thing]  spread  in  all  that  land. 

And  when  Jesus   had  passed  from  there,  two  27 
blind  men  followed  after  him,   and  said :    Ilavc 
mercy  on  us.   Thou   Son  of  David!      (28)  And  28 
when  he  had  entered  a  house,  those  blind  men  ap- 
proached him,  and  Jesus  said  to  them :  Believe  ye 
that  I  am  able  to  do  this  ?     They  said  to  him.  Yes, 
our  Lord.     (29)  Then  he  touched  their  eyes,  and  29 
.said :  As  ye  have  believed,  so  shall  it  be  to  3'ou. 
(30)  And  forthwith  their  eyes  were  opened.     And  30 
Jesus  charged  them  and  said :  See,  that  no  man 
know  [of  it].     (31)  But  they  went  out  and  spread  31 
the  fixme  of  it  in  all  that  land. 

And  as  Jesus  went  out,  they  brought  to  him  a  32 
dumb  man  in  whom  was  a  demon. '>     (33)  And  33 
when  the  demon  had  gone  out,  the  dumb  man 
conversed.      And    the    multitudes    admired,    and 
said:  Never  was  it  so  seen  in  Israel!     (34)  But  34 
the  Pharisees  said :  It  is  by  the  Prince  of  demons, 
he  casteth  out  demons. 

And  Jesus  travelled  over  all  the  cities  and  the  35 
villages:  and  he  taught  in  their  synagogues,  and 
proclaimed  the  tidings  of  the  kingdom,  and  healed 
all  diseases  and  all  pains.     (36)  And  when  Jesus  36 
looked  on  the  multitudes,  he  pitied  them ;  because 
they  were  wearied  and  dispersed,  like  sheep  that 
have  no  shepherd.     (37)  And  he  said  to  his  dis-  37 
ciples.  The  harvest  is  great,  and  the  laborers  few. 
(38)  Entreat,  therefore,  of  the  Lord  of  the  harvest,  38 
that  he  would  send  laborers  into  his  harvest. 

And  he  called  his  twelve  disciples''  [to  him],  X. 
and  gave  them  authority  over  unclean  spirits'*  to 
cast  them  out,  and  to  heal  every  pain  and  disease. 
(2)  And  the  names  of  those  twelve  Legates^  are     2 
these:  The  first  of  them,^  Simon  who  is  called 
Cephas,  and  Andrew  his  brother ;  and  James  the 
sou  of  Zebadee,  and  John  his  brother;   (3)  and     3 
Philip,  and  Bartholomew,  and  Thomas,  and  Mat- 
thew the  juiblican;  and  James  the  son  of  Alpheus, 
land  Lcbbeus  who  was  called  Thaddeus;  (4)  and     4 


MATTHEW,    X. 


17 


Simon  the  Canaanite,  and  Judas  Iscariot/  lie  who 

5  betrayed  him.  (5)  These  twelve  Jesus  sent  forth  : 
and  he  commanded  them  and  said :  Go  not  in  the 
way  of  the  Gentiles:*"  and  enter  not  the  cities  of 

6  the  Samaritans.     (6)  But,  go  ye  rather  to  the  lost 

7  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel.  (7)  And  as  ye  go, 
proclaim  and  say :  The  kingdom  of  heaven  hath 

8  approached.  (8)  Heal  ye  the  sick;  cleanse  the 
leprous;   [raise  theiiead;]?  and  cast  out  demons. 

9  Freely  ye  have  received ;  freely  give.    (9)  Provide 

10  not  gold,  nor  silver,  nor  brass  in  your  purses;  (10) 
nor  a  wallet  for  the  journey :  neither  two  coats, 
nor  shoes,  nor  a  staff.     For  the  laborer  is  worthy 

11  of  his  food.  (11)  And  into  whatever  city  or  town 
ye  enter,  inquire,  Avho  in  it  is  worthy;  and  there 

12  stay  until  ye  depart.     (12)  And  when  ye  enter  a 

13  house,  salute^  the  household.  (13)  And  if  the 
house  be  worthy,  your  peace'  will  come  upon  it ; 
l)ut  if  it  be  not  worthj^,  your  peace  will  return 

11  upon  yourselves.  (14)  And  whoever  will  not  re- 
ceive you,  nor  hear  your  discourses,  when  ye  de- 
part from  that  house  or  that  town,  shake  off  the 

15  dust  from  your  feet.  (15)  Verily  I  say  to  you, 
that  it  will'  be  comfortable  for  the  land  of  Sodom 
and  Gomorrah  in  the  day  of  judgment,  rather  than 
for  that  city. 

16  Behold,  I  send  you  forth  as  sheep  among  wolves. 
Therefore  be  ye  sagacious  as  serpents,  and  guile- 

17  less  as  doves.  (17)  And  beware  of  men;  for  they 
will  deliver  you  over  to  the  tribunals,  and  will 

18  scourge  you  in  their  synagogues.  (18)  And  they 
will  bring  you  before  governors^  and  kings,  on 
iny  account,  for  a  testimony  to  them  and  to  the 

19  Gentiles.  (19)  And  when  they  deliver  you  up,  be 
not  anxious  how  or  what  ye  shall  speak  ;  for  it 

20  shall  be  given  you  in  that  hour  what  to  say.  (20) 
For  it  is  not  ye  that  speak,  but  the  spirit  of  your 

21  Father  speaking  in  you.  (21)  And  brother  shall 
deliver  up  his  brother  to  death,  and  a  father  his 
son  ;  and  children  shall  rise  up  against  parents, 

22  and  cause  them  to  die.  (22)  And  ye  shall  be 
hated  by  every  one,  on  account  of  my  name.  But 
he  that' shall  endure  to  the  end,  shall  have  life. 

23  (23)  And  when  they  persecute  you  in  onei  city, 
flee  to  another  :  for  verily  I  say  to  you.  Ye  shall 
not  have  completed  all  the  cities  of  the  house  of 


'  Sy.  the  pro- 
fane. 


5  Omitted  in 
most  copies. 


'•  Sy.  ask  after 
the  peace  of  it 

'  i.  e.  your  sa- 
lam,  or  salu- 
tation. 


Sy. 

Gr.  Yj-ys^ivag. 


Sy.  this. 


18 


MATTHEW,    X. 


■"  or,  members. 


»  Sy.  ^], 
Gr.  (/.tftfapiov. 


P  Sy.  tu  cast,  or 
disseminale. 

'  Sy.  rt  sword. 

»  Sy.  /o  divide. 

'  Sy.  children 
of  Ids  house. 


Sy.  Jindclh. 


Israel,  till  the  Son  of  man  shall  come.     (24)  No  24 
disciple  is  better  than  his  rabbi;   nor  a  servant, 
than  his  lord.      (25)   It  is  sufficient  for  the  dis-  25 
ciple,  that  he  be  as  his  rabbi ;  and  the  servant, 
as  his  lord.     If  they  call  the  lord  of  the  house 
Beelzebub,  how  much  more  the  children™  of  his 
family?      (26)  Therefore  be  not  afraid  of  them ;  26 
for  there  is  nothing  covered  up,  that  shall  not  be 
exposed;    nor   concealed,  that  shall   not   become 
known.     (27)  Whatever  I  say  to  you  in  the  dark,  27 
that  speak  ye  in  the  light ;   and  what  jq  have 
licard  in  your  ears,  proclaim  ja  on  the  housetops. 

(28)  And  be  not  afraid  of  them  that  kill  the  body,  28 
but  cannot  kill  the  soul ;  but  be  afraid  rather  of 
Ilini  Avho  can  destroy  both  soul  and  body  in  hell." 

(29)  Are  not  two  sparrows  sold  for  a  farthing?"  29 
Yet  one  of  them  doth  not  fall  to  the  ground  with- 
out your  Father.     (30)  As  for  you,  even  the  hairs  30 

[of  your  head  are  all  numbered.     (31)  Therefore  be  31 
j  not   afraid :    3^0  are  more  important   than   many 
sparrows.     (32)  Wherefore,  whoever  shall  confess  32 
me  before  men,  him  will  I  also  confess  before  my 
Father  who  is  in  heaven.     (33)  But  whoever  shall  33 
deny  me  before  men,  him  will  I  also  deny  before 
my  Father  who  is  in  heaven. 

Think  not  that  I  have  come  to  sowp  quietness  3-1 
on  the  earth:  I  have  not  come  to  sow  fj[uietness, 
but  conflict.''     (35)  For  I  have  come  to  set^^  a  man  35 
against   his   father,   and   a   daugliter   against   her 
mother,  and  a  daughter-in-law  against  her  mother- 
in-law.     (36)  And  a  man's  foes  will  be  the  mem-  36 
bers  of  his  household.^     (37)  He  that  lovctli  father  37 
or  mother  more  than  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me: 
and  he  that  lovetli  son  or  daughter  more  than  me, 
is  not  worthy  of  me :  (38)  and  he  that  doth  not  38 
bear  his  cro.ss  and  follow  after  me,  is  not  worthy 
of  me.     (39)  He  that  prescrveth^  his  life,  shall  lose  39 
it:  and  he  that  loseth  his  life  for  my  sake,  shall 
preserve  it.     (10)  He  that  cntertaincth  you,  enter-  10 
taineth  me:  and  he  that  entertaineth  me,  euter- 
taineth  him  that  sent  me.     (41)  lie  that  entertain-  41 
eth  a  pro})het  in  the  name  of  a  prophet,  shall  re- 
ceive a  prophet's  reward :  and  he  that  entertaineth 
a  righteous  man  in  the  name  of  a  righteous  man, 
shall  receive  a  righteous  man's  reward.     (42)  And  42 
whoever  shall  give  one  of  these  little  ones  to  drink 


MATTHEW,    XI. 


19 


a  cup  of  cold  [water]  only,  in  tlie  name  of  a  dis- 
ciple, verily  I  say  to  you,  lie  shall  not  lose  his 
Xl.reward.  (XI.)  And  when  Jesus  had  ended  the 
instructions'"-  to  his  twelve  disciples,  he  went  from 
there,  to  teach  and  to  proclaim  in  their  cities, 

2  Now  when  John,  in  the  house  of  prisoners, 
heard  of  the  works  of  Messiah,  he  sent  by  the  hand 

3  of  his  disciples,  (3)  and  said  to  him :  Art  thou  he 

4  that  Cometh,  or  are  we  to  expect  another  ?  (4)  Jesus 
answered,  and  said  to  them :    Go,   tell  John  the 

5  things  that  ye  hear  and  see :  (5)  the  blind  see,  and 
the  lame  walk,  and  the  leprous  are  cleansed,  and 
the  deaf  hear,  and  the  dead  rise  up,  and  the  needy 

6  hear  good  tidings :  (6)  and  happy  is  he,  who  shall 

7  not  be  stumbled  at  me.  (7)  And  when  they  were 
gone,  Jesus  began  to  say  to  the  multitudes,  con- 
cerning John :  AVhat  went  ye  into  the  wilderness 

8  to  see?  A  reed  that  waved  in  the  wind?''  (8) 
And  if  not;  what  went  ye  out  to  see?  A  man 
clothed  in  delicate  robes  ?  Lo,  they  that  are 
clothed  in  delicate  [robes],  are  in  the  dwellings  of 

9  kings.  (9)  And  if  not ;  what  went  ye  out  to  sec  ? 
A  prophet  ?     Yes,  say  I  to  you,  and  more  than  a 

10  prophet.  (10)  For  this  is  he  of  whom  it  is  writ- 
ten :  Behold,  I  send  my  messenger«i  before  thy 
face,  that  he   may  prepare  the  way  before  thee. 

11  (11)  Verily  I  say  to  you,  Among  those  born  of 
women,  there  hath  not  arisen  a  greater  than  John 
the  Baptizer:  yet  the  small  one  in  the  kingdom 

12  of  heaven,  is  greater  than  he.  (12)  And  from  the 
days  of  John  the  Baptizer,  until  now,  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  is  assailed  by  force,  and  the  violent 

13  seize  it.     (13)  For  all  the  prophets  and  the  law^ 

14  prophesied,  until  the  time  of  John,  (14)  And,  if 
ye  are  willing,  receive  ye,  that  this  is  he  who  was 

15  to  come.  (15)  lie  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him 
hear ! 

1(3  But  to  what  shall  I  compare  this  generation? 
It  is  hke  to  children,  that  sit  in  the  market-jiiace 

17  and  call  to  their  associates,  (17)  and  say:  We  have 
sung  to  you,  and  ye  did  not  dance:  we  have  wailed 

18  to  you,  and  he  did  not  lament.  (18)  For  John 
came,  not  eating  and  not  drinking;  and  they  said, 

19  He  hath  a  demon.^  (19)  Tlie  Son  of  man  came, 
eating  and  drinking;    and   they  say:    Behold,   a 


»  Sy.  commands, 
or,  precepts. 


Sy.  1^0? 
Sy.  house. 

Sy.  jJDJjLD 


'  Sy.  ]Au5o], 
tlie  Pentateuch. 


Sy.  'jojj 


20 


MATTHEW,    XII. 


Sy.  ^1 


,0  I  • 


Sy.  flace  of 
seeds. 


gluttonous  man,  and  a  wine  drinker,  and  a  friend 
of  publicans  and  sinners.  But  wisdom  is  justified 
by  her  works. 

Then   began  Jesus   to   reproach   the  cities,    in  20 
which  his  many  deeds  of  power  were  wrought, 
yet  they  repented  not.    (21)  And  he  said  :  Woe  to  21 
thee,  Chorazin!     Woe  to  thee,  Bethsaida  !     For  if 
the  deeds  of  power  done  in  you,  had  been  done  in 
Tyre  and  Sidon,  doubtless,  they  would  long  ago 
have  repented  in  sackcloth  and  ashes.     (22)  IBut  I  22 
say  to  you,  It  will  be  comfortable  for  Tyre  and 
Sidon,   in  the  day  of  judgment,  rather  than  for 
you.     (23)  And  thou,  Capernaum,  which  hast  been  23 
lifted  up  to  heaven,  shalt  be  brought  down  to  the 
grave.g     For  if  those  deeds  of  power  which  were 
done  in  thee,  had  been  done  in  Sodom,  it  would 
have  stood  to  this  day.     (24)  But  I  say  to  thee,  24 
It  will  be  comfortable  for  the  land  of  Sodom,  in 
the  day  of  judgment,  rather  than  for  thee. 

At  that  time  Jesus  answered  and  said:  I  praise  25 
thee,  0  my  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  that 
thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise  and  know- 
ing, and  hast  revealed  them  to  little  children.    (26)  26 
Yes,  my  Father ;  for  so  it  seemed  good  before  thee. 

(27)  Every  thing  is  given  up  by  my  Father  to  me.  27 
And  no  one  knoweth  the  Son,  except  the  Father. 
Also,  no  one  knoweth  the  Father,  except  the  Son, 
and  he  to  whom  the  Son  is  pleased  to  reveal  [him]. 

(28)  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  wearied  and   heavily  28 
burdened,  and   I  will  ease  you.     (29)  Take  my  20 
yoke  upon  you ;    and  learn  from  me,  that  I  am 
gentle  and  subdued  in  my  heart:  and  ye  will  find 
rest  for  your  souls :  (30)  for  my  yoke  is  pleasant,  30 
and  my  burden  is  light. 

At  that  time  Jesus,  on  the  sabbath,  walked  XII. 
in  the  tillage  grounds:^    and  his   disciples  were 
hungry,  and  began  to  ])luck  the  ears  and  to  eat. 
(2)  And  Avhen  the  Pharisees  saw  them,  they  said     2 
to  kim :  See ;  thy  disciples  arc  doing  that  which 
it  is  not  lawful  to  do  on  the  sabbath.     (3)  But  he     3 
said  to  them.  Have  ye  not  read  what  David  did 
when    he  was   hungry,  and  they  that  were  with 
him?     (-1)  Ilow  he  went  to  the  house  of  God,  and     4 
ate  the  bread  of  the  Lord's  table ;  which  it  was 
not  lawful  for  him  to  eat,  nor  for  them  that  were 


MATTHEW,    XII. 


21 


what  that  is, 

yc  would  not  1 

(Jilt  fault.     (8) 


with  liim,  but  solelj  for  the  priests?     (5)  Or  have 

y-e  not  read  in  the  law,^  how  that  in  the  temple 

the  priests  profane  the  sabbath,  and  are  without 

fliult?     (6)  But  1  say  to  you,  that  a  greater  than 

the  temple  is  here.     (7)   And  if  ye  had   known 

I  desire  mercy,   and  not  sacrihee; 

lave  criminated  them  who  are  witli- 

For  the  Son  of  man,  is  lord  of  the 

sabljath 

And  Jesus  went  from  tliere,  and  came  to  their 
synagogue.  (10)  And  a  man  was  there,  Avhose 
hand  was  withered.  And  the}^  questioned  him, 
and  said,  Is  it  lawful  to  heal  on  the  sabbath  ?  that 
they  might  defame  him.  (11)  And  he  said  to 
them.  What  man  among  you  is  there,  who,  if  he 
have  a  sheep,  and  it  fall  into  a  pit  on  the  day  of 
the  sabbath,  doth  not  lay  hold  of  it  and  lift  it  out? 
(12)  Now,  how  much  better  is  a  human  being*^  than 
a  sheep !  AVherefore  it  is  lawful  to  do  what  is 
go(xl,  on  the  sabbath.  (18)  Then  said  he  to  the 
man.  Stretch  forth  thy  hand.  And  he  stretched 
out  liis  hand;  and  it  was  restored,  and  like  the 
other. ti  (14)  And  the  Pharisees  went  out  and 
held  a  consultation  against  him,  that  they  might 
destroy  him. 

But  Jesus  knew  [it];  and  he  retired  from  there. 
And  great  multitudes  followed  him :  and  he  cured 
them  all.  (16)  And  he  charged  them  not  to  make 
him  known :  (17)  that  what  Avas  spoken  by  the 
})rophet  Isaiah  might  be  fulfilled,  saying :  (18)  Be- 
hold my  servant,  in  whom  I  have  complacency ; 
my  beloved,  in  whom  my  soul  delighteth.  I  will 
}uit  my  spirit  upon  him;  and  he  shall  proclaim 
19  judgment  to  the  Gentiles.  (19)  lie  shall  not  con- 
tend, nor  be  clamorous,  nor  shall  any  one  hear  his 
voice  in  the  market-place. «  (20)  The  crushed 
reed  he  will  not  break ;  and  the  flickering  lamp  he 
will  not  extinguish ;  until  he  bring  judgment^"  to 
be  victorious.^  (21)  And  in  his  name  shall  the 
Gentiles  trust. 

Then  they  brought  to  him  a  demoniac  that  was 
dumb  and  blind;  and  he  healed  him,  so  that  the 
dumb  and  blind  man  both  talked  and  saw._  (23) 
And  all  the  multitude  were  amazed,  and  said :  Is 
not  this  the  son  of  David?  (24)  But  when  the 
Pharisees  heard  [it],  they  said :  This  man  doth  not 


9 
10 


11 


12 


13 


14 


15 

IG 
17 
18 


20 


21 


99 


24 


in  the  Penta- 
teuch. 


Sy.  a  son  of 
man. 


Sy.  itsfclhio. 


'■  or,  public 
street. 

'  i.  e.  law,  or 
justice. 

'  Sy.  to  a  vic- 
tory. 


22 


MATTHEW,    XII. 


*'  Sy.  scatlere'.h 
lo  scalier. 


Sy.  ]vn\s 


''  or,  useless. 


'  Sy.  ]i<^Vn 

^■Sy.UI 
°  Sy.  ^Q_, 


cast  out  demons,  except  by  Beelzebub  the  prince 
of  demons.     (25)  And  Jesus  knew  their  thoughts,  25 
and  said  to  them:  Every  kingdom  that  is  divided 
against  itself,    will   become   desolate;    and  every 
house  or  city  which  is  divided  against  itself,  will 
not  stand.     (26)  Now  if  Satan  cast  out  Satan,  he  26 
is  divided  against  himself;  how  then  doth  his  king- 
dom stand?     (27)  And  if  I  by  Beelzebub  cast  out  27 
demons,  by  whom  do  your  children  cast  them  out"? 
Wherefore  they  will  be  your  judges.     (28)  But  if  28 
I  by  the  Spirit  of  God  cast  out  demons,  the  king- 
dom of  God  hath  come  near  to  you.     (29)  Or  how  29 
can  one  enter  the  house  of  a  strong  man,  and  plun- 
der his  goods,  unless  he  first  bind  the  strong  man  ? 
and  then  he  may  plunder  his  house.     (30)  He  that  30 
is  not  with  me,  is  against  me ;  and  he  that  gather- 
eth  not  with  me  actually  scattereth.^     (§1)  There-  31 
fore  I  say  to  you,  that  all  sins  and  contumelies 
shall  be  forgiven  to  men ;  but  the  contumely  which 
is  against  the  Spirit,  shall  not  be  forgiven  to  men, 
(32)  And  whoever  shall  speak  a  word  against  the  32 
Son  of  man,  it  will  be  forgiven  him:  but  whoever 
shall  speak  against  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  will  not  be 
forgiven  him; — not  in  this  world,'  and  not  in  the 
world  to  come.     (33)  Either  make  the  tree  good,  33 
and  its  fruits  good ;  or  make  the  tree  bad,  and  its 
fruits  bad :  for  a  tree  is  known  by  its  fruits.     (34)  3-i 
Ollsj^ring  of  vipers,  how  can  ye  who  are  evil,  speak 
good  things  ?    For  out  of  the  fullnesses  of  the  heart 
the  mouth  speaketh.     (35)  A  good  man  out  of  good  35 
treasures  bringeth  forth  good  things,  and  a  bad  man 
out  of  bad  treasures  bringeth  forth  bad  things. 
(36)  For  I  say  to  you,  That  for  every  idle^  word  36 
that  men  shall  speak,  they  shall  give  account  of  it 
in  the  day  of  judgment.     (37)  For  by  thy  Avords  37 
thou  shalt  be  justilied ;    and  by  thy  words  thou 
shalt  be  condemned. 

Then  answered  some  of  the  Scribes  and  of  the  38 
Pharisees,  and  said  to  him:  Teacher,^  we  wish  to 
see  from  thee  a  sign.'"     (39)  But  ho  replied  and  39 
said  to  them  :  A  wicked  and  adulterous  generation 
dcmandeth  a  sign  :  but  a  sign  will  not  be  given  to 
it,  unless  it  be  the  sign  of  Jonah"  the  prophet. 
(40)  For  as  Jonah  was  in  the  belly  of  the  lish  three  40 
days  and  three  nights;  so  will  the  Son  of  man  be 
in  the   heart  of  the  earth  three   days  and  three 


MATTHEW,  XIII. 


23 


41  nights.  (41)  The  people  of  Nineveh  will  stand  up 
in  the  judgment  against  this  generation,  and  will 
condemn  it :  for  they  repented  at  the  preaching  of 
Jonah ;    and   lo,    a   greater  than    Jonah  is  here. 

42  (42)  The  queen  of  the  souths  will  stand  up  in  the 
judgment  against  this  generation,  and  will  con- 
demn it :  for  she  came  from  the  extremities?  of  the 
earth  to  hear  the  wisdom  of  Solomon ;  and  lo,  a 

43  superior  to  Solomon  is  here.  (48)  And  when  an 
unclean  spirit  goeth  out  of  a  man,  it  wandereth  in 
places  where  is  no  water,  and  seeketh  comfort  and 

44  findeth  [it]  not.  (44)  Then  it  saith :  I  will  return 
to  my  house,  from  which  I  came  out.  And  it 
Cometh,  and  findeth  it  vacated,  and  swept  clean, 

45  and  set  in  order.  (45)  So  it  goeth  and  taketh 
with  it  seven  other  spirits,  worse  than  itself,  and 
they  enter  and  dwell  in  it;  and  the  end  of  that 
man  is  worse  than  his  beginning.  So  will  it  be  to 
this  evil  generation. 

4G  And  while  he  was  discoursing  to  the  multitudes, 
his  mother  and  his  brothers  came  and  stood  with- 

47  out,  and  sought  to  speak  with  him.  (47)  And  a 
person  said  to  him :  Lo,  thy  mother  and  thy 
brothers   stand  without,  and  seek  to  speak  with 

48  thee.  (48)  But  he  replied,  and  said  to  him  that 
informed  him:  Who  is  my  mother?  and  who  are 

49  my  brothers?  (49)  And  he  stretched  forth  his 
hand  towards  his  disciples,  and  said :  Behold  my 

50  mother,  and  behold  my  brothers !  (50)  For  every 
one  that  doeth  the  good  pleasure  of  my  Father  who 
is  in  heaven,  that  person  is  my  brother,  and  my 
sister,  and  my  mother. 

XIII.  And  on  that  day  Jesus  went  out  of  the  house, 

2  and  sat  by  the  side  of  the  sea.  (2)  And  great 
multitudes  assembled  around  him;  so  that  he 
embarked  and  seated  himself  in  a  ship,  and  all  the 

3  multitude  stood  on  the  shore  of  the  sea.  (3)  And 
he  discoursed  with  them  much,  by  similitudes. 'i 
And  he  said.  Behold,  a  sower  went  forth  to  sow. 

4  (4)  And  as  he  sowed,  some  [seed]  fell  upon  the 
side  of  a  path :  and  a  bird  came  and  devoured  it 

5  (5)  And  other  [seed]  fell  upon  a  rock,  so  that  it 
had  not  much  soil:  and  it  sprung  up  forthwith, 

6  because  there  was  no  depth  of  earth.  (6)  But 
when  the  sun  was  up  it  wilted.     And,  because  it 


"  Sy.  ]ivn.; 


or,  parables. 
Sy.  lZ]J^£o 


2i 


MATTHEW,    XIII. 


or,  parables. 


'  or,  he  turned; 
or,  turn  them- 
selves. 


Sy.  temporary. 


oSy. 


12 


U 


lacked  root,  it  dried  up.     (7)  And  other  [seed]  fell     7 
among  thorns :  and  the  thorns  shot  up,  and  choked 
it.     (8)  And  other  [seed]  fell  on  good  ground  ;  and     8 
bore  fruits,  some  a  hundredfold,   some  sixtyfold, 
and   some_  thirtjfold.     (9)  He  that   hath  ears  to     9 
hear,  let  him  hear. 

And  his  disciples  came  and  said  to  him,  Why  10 
discourscst  thoa  to  them  in  similitudes  ?''    (11)  And  11 
he  answered,  and  said  to  them :  Because,  to  you  it 
is  given  to  know  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  but  to  them  it  is  not  given,     (12)  For  to 
him  that  hath,  shall  be  given;  and  he  shall  abound: 
but  from  him  that  hath  not,  even  what  he  hath 
shall  be  taken  from  him.     (13)  For  this  cause  I 
discourse  to  them  in  similitudes,  because  they  see 
and  do  not  see,  and  they  hear  and  do  not  hear,  nor 
understand.     (14)    And   in  them  -is   fulfilled  the 
prophecy  of  Isaiah,  who  said :  By  hearing  ye  shall 
hear,  and  shall  not  understand ;  and  by  seeing  ye 
see,  and  shall  not  know :  (15)  For  the  heart  of  this  15 
people  hath  grown  fat,  and  with  their  ears  they 
have  heard  heavily,  and  their  eyes  they  have  closed; 
lesl;  they  should  see  with  their  eyes,  and  should 
hear  with  their  ears,  and  should  understand  with 
their  heart,  and  should  turn;^  and  I  should  heal 
them.     (10)   But  happy  are  your  eyes,   for  they  16 
see  ;  and  your  ears,  for  they  hear.     (17)  For  verily  17 
I  say  to  you.  That  many  prophets  and  righteous 
[men]  longed  to  see  what  ye  see,  and  did  not  see 
[it] ;  and  to  hear  what  ye  hear,  and  did  not  hear 
[it].     (18)  But  hear  ye  the  similitude  of  the  seed. 

(19)  Every  one  that  heareth  the  word  of  the  king- 
dom, and  understandeth  it  not,  the  evil  one  cometh 
and  snatcheth  away  the  seed  sowed  in  his  heart : 
this  is  what  was  sowed  by  the  side  of  the  path, 

(20)  And  that  which  was  sowed  on  the  rock,  is  ho 
that  heareth  the  word,  and  at  once  rcceiveth  it 
with  joy.  (21)  Yet  hath  he  no  root  in  him,  but  is 
of  short  duration  ;'^  and  when  there  is  trouble  or 
persecution  on  account  of  the  word,  he  soon  stum- 
bleth.  (22)  And  that  which  was  sowed  among 
thorns,  is  he  that  heareth  the  word ;  and  care  for 
this  world<^  and  the  deceptivcncss  of  riches,  choke 
the  word;  and  he  is  without  fruits.  (23)  But  that  23 
whicli  was  sowed  on  good  ground,  is  he  that 
heareth  my  word,  and  understandeth,  and  beareth 


18 
19 


20 
21 


22 


MATTHEW,    XIII. 


25 


fruits,  and  yieldeth,  some  a  hundredfold,  some  six- 
tyfold,  and  some  tliirtvfold. 

24  Another  simihtude  he  proposed^"  to  them,  and 
said:  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  hke  to  a  man  who 

25  sowed  good  seed  in  his  field,  (25)  And  while 
people  were  asleep,  his  enemy  came  and  sowed  tares 

26  among  the  wheat,  and  went  away.  (26)  And 
when  the  plant  shot  up  and  bore  fruits,  then  ap- 

27  peared  also  the  tares.  (27)  And  the  servants  of 
the  householders  came,  and  said  to  him,  Our  lord, 
didst  thou  not  sow  good  seed  in  th}^  field?     From 

28  whence  are  the  tares  in  it.  (28)  And  he  said  to 
them,  An  enemy  hath  done  this.  The  servants 
said  to   him,  Is  it  thy  pleasure   that  we  go  and 

29  gather  them  out  ?  (29)  And  he  said  to  them, 
[No,]  lest,  while  ye  gather  out  the  tares,  ye  also 

30  eradicate  the  wheat  with  them.  (30)  Let  them 
both  grow  together  until  the  harvest;  and  at  the 
time  of  harvest,  I  will  say  to  the  reapers.  Gather 
out  first  the  tares,  and  bind  them  in  bundles  to  be 
burned;  but  the  wheat  gather  ye  into  my  granary. 

31  (31)  Another  similitude  proposed  he  to  them, 
and  said:  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  to  a 
kernel  of  mustard  seed,  which  a  man  took  and 

32  sowed  in  his  field,  (32)  And  this  is  the  least  of 
all  seeds ;  but  when  it  is  grown,  it  is  greater  than 
all  the  herbs,  and  becometh  a  tree,  so  that  a  bird 
of  heaven  may  come  and   nestle  in  its  branches. 

33  (33)  Another  similitude  spake  he  to  them.  The 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  the  leaven,  which  a 
woman  took  and  buried  in  three  measures''  of  meal, 

34  until  the  whole  fermented.  (31)  All  these  things 
Jesus  discoursed  to  the  multitude  in  similitudes;' 
and  without  similitudes  he  did  not  discourse  with 

35  \hem.  (35)  That  so  might  be  fulfilled  that  which 
mis  spoken  by  the  prophet,  who  said  :  I  will  open 
mj  mouth  in  similitudes  ;  I  will  utter^  things  con- 
ceded from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world. 

36  T\ien  Jesus  sent  away  the  multitudes,  and  went 
into  the  house.  And  his  disciples  came  to  him, 
and  snid :  Explain  to  us  the  similitude  of  the  tares 

37  and  the  field.  (37)  And  he  answered,  and  said  to 
them :  jle  that  soweth  tlic  good  seed,  is  the  Son  of 

38  God.  (^)  And  the  field  is  the  world.^  And  the 
good  seed  are  the  children  of  the  kingdom;  but 
the  tares  are   the   children   of  the   wicked   One. 


''  Sy.  allego- 
rized. 


^  Sy.  lord  of  the 
house. 


,•>  Sy.  ^llD 
'  or,  parables. 

^  Sy.  eructate. 


1  Sy.  ]Lq\i 


26 


MATTHEW,    XIII. 


"  Sy.  consurrv- 
mation. 

0  Sy.  ]vnVv 


r  or,  good. 


Sy. 


Gr. 


yivos. 


Sy.  consum- 
malion. 


S9 


or,  parables. 


Sy. 


40 
41 


43 
44 


(39)  The  enemy  tliat  sowed  tliem,  is  Satan."i 
The  harvest  is  the  end"  of  the  world :«  and  the 
reapers  are  the  angels.  (40)  As  therefore  the 
tares  are  gathered  and  burned  in  the  fire ;  so  will 
it  be  in  the  end  of  the  world.  (41)  The  Son  of 
man  will  send  forth  his  angels,  and  they  will 
gather  out  of  his  kingdom  all  the  stumbling  blocks, 
and  all  the  doers  of  evil ;  (42)  and  will  cast  them  42 
into  a  furnace  of  fire.  There  will  be  wailing  and 
gnashing  of  teeth,  (43)  Then  will  the  righteous 
shine  as  the  sun,  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father. 
He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear.  (44)  Again, 
the  kinofdom  of  heaven  is  like  a  treasure  that  is 
hid  in  a  field ;  Avhich  when  a  man  findeth,  he  con- 
cealeth  it,  and,  from  his  joy,  he  goeth  and  selleth 
all  that  he  hath,  and  buj^eth  that  field.  (45)  Again,  45 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  a  merchantman,  who 
sought  after  richp  pearls  :■■  (46)  and  when  he  found  46 
one  pearl  of  great  price,  he  went  and  sold  all  that 
he  had,  and  bought  it.  (47)  Again,  the  kingdom  47 
of  heaven  is  like  a  sweep,  net,  which  was  cast  into 
the  sea,  and  collected  [fishes]  of  every  kind.^  (48)  48 
And  when  it  Was  full,  they  drew  it  to  the  shores  of 
the  sea ;  and  they  sat  down  and  culled  over  :  and 
the  good  they  put  into  vessels,  and  the  bad  they 
cast  away.  (49)  So  will  it  be  in  the  end*  of  the 
world.  The  angels  will  go  forth,  and  will  sever 
the  wicked  from  among  the  just;  (50)  and  will 
cast  them  into  a  furnace  of  fire.  There  will  be 
wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth. 

Jesus  said  to  them :  Have  ye  understood  all 
these  things?  They  say  to  him :  Yes,  our  Lord. 
(52)  He  said  to  them  :  Therefore  every  Scribe  who  52 
is  instructed  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  is  like  a 
man  who  is  master  of  a  house,  who  bringeth  fortii 
from  his  treasures  things  new  and  old,  (53)  A'ld 
it  was  so,  that  when  Jesus  had  ended  these  siniili- 
tudcs,v  he  departed  thence. 

And  he  entered  into  his  own  city.  And  he 
taught  them  in  their  synagogacs,  in  such  n:anner 
that  they  wondered,  and  said:  Whence  lath  he 
this  wisdom  and  [these]  works  of  power  ?  (55)  Is 
not  this  man  the  carpenter's  son'/^^  js  not  his 
mother  called  Mary,  and  his  brothers  James  and 
Joses  and  Simon  and  Judas?  (56)  And  all  his 
sisters,  are  they  not  with  us  ?     Whence  then  hath 


49 


50 


51 


53 


54 


t)0 


56 


MATTHEW,    XIV. 


27 


57  this  man  all  these  things?  (57)  And  they  were 
stumbled  at  him.  But  Jesus  said  to  them  :  There 
is  no  prophet  who  is  little,  except  in  his  own  city 

58  and  in  his  own  house.  (58)  And  he  did  not  per- 
form there  many  works  of  power,  because  of  their 
unbelief. 

XIV.  And  at  that  time  Herod  the  Tetrarch   heard 

2  the  fime  of  Jesus:  (2)  and  he  said  to  his  ser- 
vants :  This  is  John  the  Baptizer :  he  is  risen 
from  the  grave  :<'^  therefore  works  of  power  are 

3  wrought  by  him.  (3)  Now  this  Herod  had  seized 
John,  and  bound  him  and  cast  him  into  prison;^ 
on  account  of  Herodias,  the  wife  of  his  brother 

4  Philip.     (4)  For  John  had  said  to  him :  It  is  not 

5  lawful  for  her  to  be  thy  wife.  (5)  And  he  had 
wished  to  kill  him  ;  but  he  was  afraid  of  the  peo- 
ple, seeing  that  they  regarded^^  him  as  a  prophet. 

6  (6)  But  when  Herod's  birthday  festival*^  occurred, 
the  daughter  of  Herodias  danced  before  the  guests; 

7  and  she  pleased  Herod.  (7)  Therefore  he  swore  to 
her  by  an  oath,  that  he  would  give  her  whatsoever 

8  she  might  ask.  (8)  And  she,  as  she  had  been  in- 
structed by  her  mother,  said :  Give  me  here  in  a 

9  dishc  the  head  of  John  the  Ba2)tizer.  (9)  And  it 
troubled  the  king:  nevertheless,  on  account  of 
the  oath,  and  the  guests,  he  commanded  that  it 

10  should  be  given  her.     (10)  And  he  sent  and  cut 

11  off  the  head  of  John  in  the  prison.  (11)  And  the 
head  Avas  brought  in  a  dish  and  given  to  the  girl ; 

12  and  she  brought  it  to  her  mother.  (12)  And  his 
disciples  came  and  bore  away  the  corpse,  and 
buried  [it]  ;    and  they  went  and  informed  Jesus. 

13  (13)  And  Jesus,  when  he  had  heard  [it],  retired 
alone,  in  a  ship,  to  a  desert  place.  And  when  the 
multitudes  heard  [of  it],  they  followed  him  by  dry 
land  from  the  cities. 

14  And  when  Jesus  disembarked,  he  saw  great 
multitudes  ;  and  he  had  compassion  on  them,  and 

15  healed  their  sick.  (15)  And  when  it  was  evening, 
his  disciples  came  to.  him,  and  said  to  him:  This 
is  a  desert  place,  and  the  time  is  gone;  send  away 
the  throngs  of  people,  that  they  may  go  to  the 

16  villages,  and  buy  themselves  food.  (16)  But  he 
said  to  them :  It  is  not  necessary  for  them  to  go  ; 

17  give  ye  them  to  eat.     (17)  And  they  said  to  him: 


*  Sy,  house  of 
the  dead. 

^  Sy.  house  of 
prisoners. 


Sy.  held. 

Sy.  house  of 
his  natiiilij. 


■  Sy.  ]"^i  "^ 
Gr.  "jri'vaf-axoj. 


28 


MATTHEW,    XIV. 


o\;  filled, 

Sy.  aside  from. 


^  Gr.  Peter. 


Sy.  ;mi. 


-^5. 


9.". 


2i 


We  have  nothing  here  but  five  cakes  and  two 
dshes.     (18)  Jesus  said  to  them :  Bring  them  here  18 
to  me.   "(1^0  ^i^d  he  commanded  the  multitudes  19 
to  recline  on  the  ground :    and  he  took  the  five 
cakes   and    two    fishes,    and    he   looked   towards 
heaven,  and  blessed,  and  brake,  and  gave  to  his 
disei[)les;  and  the  disciples  placed  before  the  mul- 
titudes.   (20)  And  thcj  all  ate,  and  were  satisfied  :f  20 
and  ihQy  took  up  the  broken  remains,  twelve  full 
baskets.     (21)  And  the  men  who  had  eaten  were  21 
five  thousand,  besidess  the  women  and  children. 

And  immediately  he  constrained  his  disciples  to  22 
embark  in  a  ship,  and  to  go  before  him  to  the  other 
side,  while  he  sent  away  the  multitudes.    (23)  And 
when  he  had  sent  the  multitudes  away,  he  ascended 
a  mountain  alone  to  pray.    And  when  it  was  dark, 
he  was  there  alone.  •  (24)  And  the  ship  was  dis- 
tant from  land  many  furlongs :  meanwhile  it  was 
much  tossed  by  the  waves ;  for  the  wind  was  ad- 
verse to  it.     (25)  And  in  the  fourth  watch  of  the  25 
night,  Jesus  came  up  to  them,  walking  upon  the 
waters.     (20)  And  his  disciples  saw  him  as  he  walk-  2G 
ed  upon  the  waters,  and  they  were  perturbated: 
and  they  said.  What  we  see  is  a  spectre  :  and  they 
cried  out  through  fear.  (27)  But  Jesus  immediately  27 
spoke  to  them,  and  said:  Have  courage:  it  is  I;  be 
not  afraid.  (28)  Cephas^'  replied,  and  said  to  him :  My  28 
Lord,  if  it  be  thou,  bid  me  come  to  thee  on  the 
waters.    (29)  And  Jesus  said  to  him,  Come.     And 
Cephas  descended  from  the  ship,  and  walked  upon 
the  waters  to  go  to  Jesus.     (30)  But  when  he  saw 
the  wind  to  be  violent,  he  was  afraid,  and  began  to 
sink.     And  he  raised  his   voice,   and  said:    My 
Lord,  rescue  me.     (31)  And  immediately  our  Lord  31 
reached  forth  his  hand,  and  caught  him,  and  said 
to  him:  O  small  in  faith,  why  didst  thou  distrust! 
(32)  And  as  they  entered  the  ship,  the  wind  sub-  32 
sided.     (33)  And  they  that  were  in  the  ship,  came  33 
and  worshi])ped  him,  and  said:    Truly  thou  art  the 
Son  of  God  1     (34)  And  they  rowed  on,  and  came  34 
to  the  land  of  Gennesaret.'     (35)  And  the  men  of  35 
that  place  knew  him:  and  they  sent  to  all  the  vil- 
lages around  them;    and  they  brought  to  him  all 
tliat  were  very  sick;   (36)  and  they  entreated  of 
him,  that  they  might  touch  at  lenst  the  exti'cmity 
of  his  garment.  And  they  who  touched,  were  healed. 


29 


30 


36 


MATTHEW,    XV. 


29 


0 


9 


XV,    Then  came  to  Jesus  Pharisees  and  Scribes  that 

2  were  from  Jerusalem,  and  said:  (2)  Why  do  thy 
disciples  transgress  the  tradition  of  the  elders,* 
and  Wash   not  their  hands  when  they  eat  bread? 

3  (3)  Jesus  replied  and  said  to  them :  Why  do  ye 
also  transgress  the  commandment  of  God,  on  ac- 

4  count  of  your  tradition?  (-4)  For  God  hath  said: 
Honor  thy  father,  and  thy  mother;  and  he  that 
revileth  his  father  or  his  mother,  shall  be  put  to 

0  death.''  (5)  But  ye  say:  Whosoever  shall  say  to 
a  fotlier  or  to  a  mother.  Be  that  my  oflering,  by 
Avhich  ye  get  profit  from  me:  then<=  he  must  not 
lionor'^  his  father  or  his  mother.  (6)  And  [thus] 
ye  make  void  the  word  of  God,  for  the  sake  of 

7  your  tradition.     (7)   Ye  hypocrites,  well  did  the 

5  prophet  Isaiah  prophesy  of  you,  and  say :  (8)  This 
people  honoreth  me  with  the  lips,  but  their  heart 
is  far  from  me.  (9)  And  in  vain  they  pay  me 
homage,  while  they  teach  doctrines  that  are  the 
precepts  of  men.'  (10)  And  he  called  the  multi- 
tudes, and  said  to  them.  Hear  and  understand. 

11  (11)  Not  that  which  entereth  the  mouth,  defileth 
a  man  ;  but  that  which  proceedeth  from  the  mouth, 
that  defileth  a  man.  (12)  Then  came  his  disciples, 
and  said  to  him :  Knowest  thou,  that  the  Pharisees 
were  offended  when  they  heard  that  speech?  (13) 
And  he  replied,  and  said  to  them:  Every  plant, ^^ 
which  my  Father  who  is  in  heaven  hath  not  planted, 
shall  be  eradicated.  (1-4)  Let  them  alone:  they 
are  blind  leaders  of  the  blind.  And  if  a  blind  man 
leadeth  one  blind,  they  will  both  foil  into  the  ditch. 

(15)  And  Simon  Cephas^  answered  and  said  to 
him:    My   Lord,    explain   to  us  this  similitude.? 

(16)  And  he  said  to  them:  Are  ye  also,  up  to  this 
time,  without  understanding?  (17)  Know  ye  not, 
that  whatever  entereth  the  mouth,  passeth  into  the 
belly,  and   from  there  is   ejected   by  purgation? 

18  (18)  But  that  which  proceedeth  from  the  mouth, 
Cometh  from  the  heart :  and  that  is  what  defileth 
a  man.  (19)  For,  from  the  heart  proceed  evil 
thoughts,  adultery,  murder,  whoredom,  theft,  false 
testimony,  reviling.  (20)  These  are  the  things 
that  defile  a  man.  But  if  a  man  eat  while  his 
hands  are  unwashed,  he  is  not  defiled. 

And  Jesus  departed  from  there,   and  went  to 


10 


12 


11: 


15 

16 
17 


19 

20 


21 


22  the  confines  of  Tyre  and  Sidon.      (22)  And  lo,  a 


Sy.  1  ■> '»  «  n 


''  Sy.  to  die 
shall  die. 

<=  Sy.  and. 

''  i.  e.  hy  kind 
offices. 


°  or,  planting. 

<■  Gr.  Peter. 
'  or,  parable. 


30 


MATTHEW,    XV. 


tSy. 


-LTD 


Sy.  ]{l» 


Sy.  breads 


Sy. 


Gr. 


woman,  a  Canaanitcss^  from  those  confines,  came 
forth,  caUing  out  and  saying :  Compassionate  me, 
my  Lord,  thou  son  of  David :  my  dauglitcr  is 
grievously  distressed  by  a  demon.*  (23)  But  he 
answered  her  not  a  word.  And  his  disciples  came 
and  requested  of  him,  and  said :  Send  her  away, 
for  she  crieth  after  us.  (24)  But  he  answered  and 
said  to  them :  I  am  not  sent,  except  to  the  sheep 
that  have  strayed  from  the  house  of  Israel.  (25) 
And  she  came,  and  worshipped  him,  and  said: 
Help  me,  my  Lord.  (26)  Jesus  said  to  her:  It  is 
not  proper,  to  take  the  bread  of  the  children  and 
throw  it  to  the  dogs.  (27)  And  she  said:  Even  so, 
my  Lord ;  yet  the  dogs  eat  of  the  fragments  that 
fall  from  the  tables  of  their  masters,  and  live. 
(28)  Then  Jesus  said  to  her :  O  woman,  great  is 
thy  faith  :  be  it  to  thee,  as  thou  desirest.  And  her 
daughter  was  cured  from  that  hour. 

And  Jesus  dej)arted  from  there,  and  came  to  the  29 
side  of  the  sea  of  Galilee:  and  he  ascended  a 
mountain,  and  sat  there.  (30)  And  great  multi- 
tudes came  to  him ;  and  with  them  were  the  lame, 
and  the  blind,  and  the  dumb,  and  the  maimed,  and 
many  others :  and  they  laid  them  at  the  feet  of 
Jesus,  and  he  healed  them.  (31)  So  that  the  mul- 
titudes were  amazed,  when  thay  saw  the  dumb 
speaking,  and  the  maimed  made  whole,  and  the 
lame  walking,  and  the  blind  seeing:  and  they 
praised  the  God  of  Israel.  (32)  Then  Jesus  called  32 
his  disciples,  and  said  to  them :  I  pity  this  multi- 
tude ;  for  lo,  tliese  three  days  they  have  continued 
with  me,  and  they  have  nothing  to  eat :  and  I  am 
unwilling  to  send  them  away  fasting,  lest  they 
faint  by  the  way.  (33)  Ilis  disciples  say  to  him : 
Whence  can  we  get  bread  in  the  wilderness,  to 
satisfy  all  this  multitude?  (34)  Jesus  said  to 
them,  Uow  many  loaves  have  ye  ?  They  said  to 
him,  Seven,  and  a  few  little  fishes.  (35)  And  he 
commanded  the  multitudes  to  recline  on  the 
ground.  (36)  And  he  took  the  seven  loaves'^  and 
the  fishes,  and  gave  thanks,  and  brake,  and  gave 
to  his  disciples ;  and  the  disciples  gave  to  the  mul- 
titudes. (37)  And  they  all  ate,  and  were  satisfied. 
And  they  took  up  the  remains  of  fragments,  seven 
full  baskets.i  (3S)  And  they  that  had  eaten  were 
(f'^r-jpiosg.  I  four  thousand  men,  besides  women  and  children. 


24 


26 
27 


28 


30 


31 


'^cd1,| 


33 


35 
36 


37 

38 


MATTHEW,    XVI. 


31 


39  (39)  And  wlien  he  had  sent  away  the  multitudes, 
he  took  ship,  and  came  to  the  coasts  of  Magdala.*" 

XVI.  And  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  came  near,  tempt- 
ing him,   and  asking  him  to  show  them   a  sign 

2  from  heaven.  (2)  But  he  answered,  and  said  to 
them :  When  it  is  evening  ye  say,  It  will  be  fair 

3  weather  ;  for  the  heavens^  are  red.  (3)  And  in  the 
morning  ye  say.  There  will  be  a  storm  to-day; 
for  the  heavens  are  sadly  red.  Ye  hypocrites,  ye 
are  intelligent  to  discover  the  aspect  of  the  heavens, 
but  the  signs  of  this  time  ye  have  no  skill  to  dls- 

4  cern.  (4)  A  wicked  and  adulterous  generation 
asketh  for  a  sign ;  but  no  sign  shall  be  given  it, 
but  the  sign  of  the  prophet  Jonah.  And  he  left 
them,  and  departed. 

5  And  when  his  disciples  had  come  to  the  farther 
shore,  1^  they  had   forgotten   to   take   bread  with 

6  them.  (6)  And  he  said  to  them:  Take  heed,  and 
beware  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees  and  the  Sad- 

7  ducees.  (7)  And  they  reasoned  among  themselves, 
and  said,  [it  was]  because  they  had  taken  no  bread. 

8  (8)  But  Jesus  knew  [it]  and  said  to  them :  O  ye 
small  in  faith !   why  reason  ye  among  yourselves 

9  because  ye  have  taken  no  bread?  (9)  Ilave  ye 
not  yet  understood  ?  Do  ye  not  remember  the  five 
loaves  and  the  five  thousand,  and  the  many  bask- 

10  ets^^  ye  took  up  ?  (10)  Nor  the  seven  loaves  and 
the  four  thousand,  and  the  many  baskets'^  ye  took 

11  up?  (11)  How  is  it  that  ye  do  not  understand 
that  it  was  not  concerning  bread  that  I  spoke  to 
you ;  but  that  ye  should  beware  of  the  leaven  of 

12  the  Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees?  (12)  Then 
understood  they,  that  he  did  not  bid  them  beware 
of  the  leaven  of  bread,  but  of  the  doctrine*'  of  the 
Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees. 

13  And  when  Jesus  came  into  the  region  of  Cae- 
sarea  Philippi,  he  questioned  his  disciples,  and 
said :  What  do  men  say  concerning  me,  that  I  the 

14  Son  of  man,  am?  (14)  And  they  said:  Some  say 
that  [thou  art]  John  the  Baptizer;  but  others, 
Elijah ;  and  others,  Jeremiah,  or  one  of  the  proph- 

15  ets.     (15)    He   said  to   them:    But,    who   do   ye 

16  yourselves  say  that  I  am?  (16)  Simon  Cephas'" 
answered  and  said :  Thou  art  the  Messiah,  the  Son 

17  of  the  hving  God.     (17)  Jesus  answered,  and  said 


Sy.o, 


.^ 


Sy.  ilic  heaven 
is. 


'  Sy.  l;n%\ 


'  Sy. 
,^  1 1  I  g^O  O 

'■  Sy. 


e  Sy. 


'  Gr.  Simon  Pe- 
ter. 


^.9 


MATTHEW,    XVII. 


^  Sy.  "i^lo  ; 
i.  e.  a  rock. 

^  Sy.  »jZj.1. 

■  Sy.  ^CL..^, 
^Ae  grave. 

^  Sy.  1,:V.o, 
Gr.  xX;((Jaj. 

'  Sy.  ]  «  "i  I,  O 
'"  Sy. 

°  Gr.  Pe/er. 
"  S3-,  tj^m 


P  Sy.  to  keep  his 
soul  alive. 


Sy.  cn  it.^1 


»  Gr.  Pe/er. 


to  liim:    Blessed  art  thou,  Simon  son  of  Jonas; 
for  flesh  and  blood  have  not  revealed  [it]  to  thee, 
but  my  Father  who  is  in  heaven.     (18)  Also  I  say  18 
to  thee,  that  thou  art  Cephas:  and  upon  this  rock,g 
[  will  build  my  church  :h  and  the  gates  of  death' 
shall  not  triumph  over  it.     (19)  To  thee  will  I  19 
give  the  keysi^  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven:    and 
whatever  thou  slialt  bind  on  earth,  shall  be  bound 
in  heaven :   and  whatever   thou   shalt  unbind  on 
earth,  shall  be  unbound  in  heaven.      (20)    Then  20 
he  enjoined  on  his  disciples,  that  they  should  tell 
no  man  that  he  was  the  Messiah. 

And   from  that  time  Jesus  began  to  show  to  21 
his  disciples,  that  he  was  to  go  up  to  Jeru.salem, 
and  to  suffer   much    from   the  Elders,'  and   from 
the  chief  priests'"  and  Scribes,  and  be  killed,  and 
on  the  third  day  arise.     (22)  And  Cephas'^  took  22 
him,  and  began  to  rebuke  him;  and  he  said:  Far 
be  it  from  thee,  my  Lord,  that  this  should  be_  to 
thee.     (23)   But  he  turned,  and  said  to  Cephas:  23 
Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan  :»  Thou  art  a  stumbling- 
block  to  me ;   for  thou  thinkcst  not  the  things  of 
God,  but  the  things  of  men. 

Then  said  Jesus  to  his  disciples :  If  any  one  de-  24 
sireth  to  come  after  me,  let  him  deny  himself;  and 
let  him  bear  his  cross,  and  come  after  me.     (25)  25 
For,  whoever  chooseth  to  preserve  his  life,P  shall 
lose  it;    and   whoever  will   lose  his  life  for  my 
sake,  shall  find  it.      (2G)   For  what  will  it  profit  26 
a  man,  if  he   shall   gain   the   whole    world,   and 
shall  lose  his  soul?""   'Or  what  will   a  man   give 
in  exchange  for  his  soul?     (27)  For  the  Son  of  27 
man  is  to  come  in  the  glory  of  his  Father,  with 
all  his  holy  angels  ;    and  then  will  he  recompense 
to   every   man  as  his  deeds  are.      (28)   Verily  I  28 
say  to   you :    There  are   some   persons   standing 
here,  who  shall  not  taste  death,  till  they  see  the 
Son  of  man  coming  in  his  kingdom. 

And   after   six   days   Jesus   took   Cephas, i^  XVII. 
and  James,  and  John  his  brother,  and  conducted 
them  alone  to  a  high  mountain.     (2)  And  Jesus     2 
was  changed  before  them:  and  his  face  shone  like 
the  sun;  and  his  vestments  became  white  like  the 
light.     (3)  And  there  appeared  to  them  Moses  and     3 
Elijah,  in  conversation  with  him.     (4)  Then  Ce-     4 


MATTHEW,    XVII. 


33 


plias  answered  and  said  to  Jesus :  My  Lord,  it  is 
good  for  us  to  be  here:  and,  if  it  please  thee,  we 
will  make  here  three  booths  ;    one  for  thee,  and 

5  one  for  Moses,  and  one  for  Elijah,  (5)  And  while] 
he  was  yet  speaking,  lo,  a  bright  cloud  over- 
shadowed them :  and  there  was  a  voice  from  the 
cloud  which  said :   This  is  my  beloved  Son,   in 

6  whom  I  have  pleasure ;  hear  ye  him.  (6)  And 
when  the  disciples  heard  [it],  they  fell  on  their 

7  faces,  and  were  much  afraid.  (7)  And  Jesus  came 
to  them  and  touched  them,  and  said :  Arise,  and 

8  be  not  afraid.      (8)  And  they  raised  their  eyes, 

9  and  they  saw  no  person,  except  Jesus  only.  (9) 
And  as  they  came  down  from  the  mountain,  Jesus 
charged  them,  and  said  to  them :  Speak  of  this 
vision  before  no  person,  until  the  Son  of  man  shall 

10  have  arisen  from  the  dead.  (10)  And  his  disciples 
asked  him,  and  said  to  him :    Why  then  do  the 

11  Scribes  say,  that  Elijah  must  first  come?  (11)  Je- 
sus answered,  and  said  to  them :  Elijah  doth  first 

12  come,  to  fulfill  every  thing.  (12)  And  I  say  to 
you,  That,  behold,  Elijah  hath  come,  and  they  did 
not  know  him ;  and  they  have  done  to  him  what- 
ever they  pleased:  and,  in  like  manner,  also  the 

13  Son  of  man  is  to  suffer  from  them.  (13)  Then  the 
disciples  understood,  that  he  spake  to  them  of  John 
the  Baptizer. 

14:  And  when  they  came  to  the  multitude,  a  man 
approached  him,  and  bowed  himself  on  his  knees, 

15  (15)  and  said  to  him:  My  Lord,  compassionate 
me.  I  have  a  son  who  is  a  lunatic,  and  grievously 
afflicted ;  for  often  he  fallcth  into  the  fire,  and  often 

16  into  the  water.     (16)  And  I  brought  him  to  thy 

17  disciples,  and  they  could  not  heal  him.  (17)  Je- 
sus answered  and  said:  O  unbelieving  and  per- 
verse generation  !  How  long  shall  I  be  with  you  ? 
and  how  long  bear  with  you?     Bring  him  here  to 

18  me.  (18)  And  Jesus  rebuked  the  demon,  and  it 
departed  from  him :  and  from  that  hour  the  child 

19  was  healed.  (19)  Then  came  the  disciples  to  Je- 
sus, apart,  and  said  to  him :  Why  could  not  we 

20  heal  him?  (20)  Jesus  said  to  them:  Because  of 
your  unbelief  For  verily  I  say  to  you,  That  if 
there  be  in  you  faith  like  a  grain  of  mustard  seed, 
ye  may  say  to  this  mountain,  Eemove  hence,  and 
it  will  remove:  and  nothing  will  be  too  hard  for 

3 


84 


MATTHEW,    XVIII. 


■=  or,  conversant. 


Sy-  ^101 


"  or,  sons  of 
freedom. 


f  Sy.  IjAcdI, 
Gr.  cTrar^pa. 

•  Sy.  1.^ 

•>  Sy. 


cSy. 


•i  Sy.  causes  of 
slumhlins[. 


•  Sy. 


you.     (21)  But  this  kind''  goetla  not  out,  except  21 
by  fasting  and  prayer. 

And  wJiile  they  were  residenf^  in  Galilee,  Jesus  22 
said  to  them :  The  Son  of  rnan  is  to  be  betrayed 
into  the  hands  of  men;   (23)  and  they   will  kill  23 
him ;  and  tlie  third  day   he  will  arise.     And  it 
saddened  them  much. 

And  when  they  came  to  Capernaum,  those  who  24 
receive  the  two  drachmas'^   of  capitation  money 
came  to  Cephas,  and  said  to  him :  Doth  not  your 
rabbi  pay  his  two  drachmas?     (25)   He  said  to  25 
them,  Yes.     And  when  Cephas  had  entered  the 
house,  Jesus  anticipated   him  and  said   to  liim: 
How  doth  it  appear  to  thee,  Simon?     The  kings 
of  the  earth,  of  whom  do  they  receive  tribute  and 
capitation  money  ?  of  their  children,  or  of  aliens  ? 
(26)  Simon  said  to  him:  Of  aliens.     Jesus  said  to  26 
him :  Then  the  children  are  free."     (27)  But  still,  27 
lest  they  be  stumbled  with  us,  go  thou  to  tlie  sea 
and  cast  in  a  fish-hook,  and  the  fish  that  shall  first 
come  up,  open  its  mouth,  and  thou  wilt  find  a 
stater  :f  that  take,  and  give  for  me  and  for  thyself. 

In  that  hour  the  disciples  approached  Je-  XVIII. 
sus,  and  said:    Who  is  the  greatest  in  the  king- 
dom of  heaven?     (2)  And  Jesus  called  a  child, 'i     2 
and  placed  him  in  the  midst  of  them,  (3)  and  said :     3 
Verily  I  su}^  to  you,  that  unless  ye  be  converted, 
and  become  lilcc  children, ^^  ye  will  not  enter  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.     (4)  He  therefore  that  shall     4 
humble  himself  like  this  child,  he  will  be  great  in 
the  kingdom  of  heaven.     (5)  And  he  that  shall     5 
receive  in  my  name  [one  who  is]  like  to  this  child, 
he  receiveth  me.     (B)  And  whosoever  shall  stum-     6 
ble  one  of  these  little  ones'"  that  believe  in  me,  it 
were  better  for  him  that  a  millstone  were  suspended 
to  his  neck,  and  that  he  Avere  sunk  in  the  depths 
of  the  sea.     (7)  Woe  to  the  world  because  of  stum-     7 
bling  blocks!"     For  it  must  be,  that  stumbling 
blocks  come.     But,  woe  to  the  person  by  whose 
means  the  stumbling  blocks  come.    (8)  If  then  thy     8 
hand  or  thy  foot  make  thee  stumble,  cut  it  olY  and 
cast  it  from  thee:  for  it  is  good  for  thee  to  enter 
into  life  lame  or  mutilated,  and  not  that,  with  two 
I  hands   or   two  feet,  thou   fall   into  eternal^   fire. 
](9)  And  if  thine  eye  make  thee  stumble,  pluck  it     9 


MATTHEW,    XVIII. 


out  and  cast  it  from  thee :  for  it  is  good  for  thee  to 
enter  into  life  with  one  eye,  and  not  that,  with  two 

10  eyes,  thou  fall  into  the  helF  of  fire.  (10)  See  that 
ye  despise  not  one  of  these  little  ones ;  for  I  say  to 
you,  That  their  angelssr  in  heaven,  at  all  times,  are 
beholding  the  face  of  my  Father  who  is  in  heaven, 

11  (11)  For  the  Son  of  man,  hath  come  to  give  life^ 

12  to  that  which  was  lost.'  (12)  How  doth  it  appear 
to  you  ?  If  a  man  should  have  a  hundred  sheep, 
and  one  of  them  should  go  astra}^,  will  he  not 
leave  the  ninety  and  nine  in  the  mountains,  and 

13  go  and  seek  the  one  that  strayed?  (13)  And  if  he 
find  it,  verily  I  say  to  3'ou,  that  he  rejoiceth  in  it, 
more  than  in  the  ninety  and  nine  that  did  not 

14  stray.  (14)  Just  so,  it  is  not  the  pleasure  of  your 
Father  who  is  in  heaven,  that  one  of  these  little 
onesk  should  perish.  1 

15  Moreover,  if  thy  brother  commit  an  ofTence'" 
against  thee,  go  and  admonish  him  between  thee 
and  him  only.     If  he  hear  thee,  thou  hast  gained 

16  thy  brother.  (16)  But  if  he  hear  thee  not,  take 
with  thee  one  or  two,  that  at  the  mouth  of  two  or 
three  witnesses  every  word"  may  be  established. 

17  (17)  And  if  he  will  also  not  hear  them,  tell  [it] 
to  the  church."  And  if  he  will  also  not  hear  the 
church,  let  him  be  to  thee  as  a  publican  and  a 

18  heathen.P  (18)  Verily  I  say  to  you,  That  whatever 
ye  shall  bindf  on  earth,  shall  be  bound  in  heaven : 
and  whatever  ye  shall  unbind  on  earth,  shall  be 

19  unbound  in  heaven.  (19)  Again  I  say  to  you, 
That  if  two  of  j^ou  shall  agree^  on  earth  concerning 
any  thing  that  they  sliall  ask,  it  shall  be  to  them* 

20  from  my  Father  who  is  in  heaven.  (20)  For  where 
two  or  three  [are]  assembled  in  my  name,  there 
[am]  I  in  the  midst  of  them. 

21  Then  Cephas"'  approached  him,  and  said  to  him. : 
My  Lord,  how  many  times,  if  my  brother  commit 
offence  against  me,^^  shall  I  forgive  him?   up  to 

22  seven  times?  (22)  Jesus  said  to  him:  I  do  not 
say  to  thee,  up  to  seven  times,  but  up  to  seventy 

23  times  seven.  (23)  Therefore  the .  kingdom  of 
heaven  is  like  to  some  king,  who  wished  to  have 

24  a  reckoning  with  his  servants.  (24)  And  when 
he   began  to  reckon,  they  brought  to  him   one 

25  debtor  of  ten  thousand  talents.^  (25)  And  as  ho 
had  not  wherewith  to  pay,  his  lord  commanded  i 


'  Sy.  IjcO^ 

KSy. 

-  Sy.  ]^ 
'  Sy.  jj^l 

''Sy. 

'  Sy.  r^h} 

-  Sy. 

■>  Sy.  ]JLd  ^ 

Oie  regular 
meeting. 

p  or,  profane 
man. 

^  Sy.  ^^mU 

'  or,  accord, 

'  i.  c.  they  shall 
have  it. 

"  Gr.  Peter. 

-  Sy.  . 


Sy.  ^jTiD 


36 


MATTHEW,    XIX. 


about  15i 
cents  each. 


Sy.  liouse  of 
prisoners. 


or,  evil,  had. 


or,  words. 


him  to  be  sold,  him  and  his  wife  and  his  children, 
and  all   that   he   possessed,   and   payment  to  be 
made.     (26)  And  that  servant  fell  down  and  wor-  26 
shipped  him,  and  said:   My  lord,  have  patience 
with  me,  and  I  will  pay  thee  the  whole.     (27)  And  27 
his  lord  had  compassion  on  that  servant,  and  set 
him  free,  and  forgave  him  his  debt.     (28)  Then  28 
that  servant  went  out,  and  found  one  of  his  fellow- 
servants  who  owed  him  a  hundred  denarii. y     And 
he  laid  hold  of  him  and  choked  him,  and  said  to 
him:  Pay  me  what  thou  owest  me.     (29)  And  29 
that  fellow-servant  fell  at  his  feet  and  entreated 
him,  and  said :   Have  patience  with  me,  and  I  will 
pay  thee  the  whole.     (30)  But  he  would  not,  but  30 
went  and  cast  him  into  prison,^  until  he  should 
pay  him  what  he  owed  him.      (31)   And  when  31 
their  fellow-servants  saw  what  was  done,  it  grieved 
them  much ;   and  they  came  and  made  known  to 
their  lord  all  that  had  occurred.     (32)  Then  his  32 
lord  called  him,  and  said  to  him :   Thou  vile''  ser- 
vant !     Lo,  I  forgave  thee  that  whole  debt,  because 
thou   entreatedst  of  me :   (33)  oughtest  not  thou  33 
also  to  have  compassion  on  th}^  fellow-servant,  as 
I  had  compassion  on  thee  ?     (34)  And  his  lord  34 
was  angry,  and  delivered  him  over  to  the  torturers, 
until  he  should  pay  all  he  owed  him.     (35)   So  35 
will  my  Father  who  is  in  heaven  do  to  you,  unless 
ye  from  your  heart  forgive  each  his  brother  his 
offence. 

And    when    Jesus    had    ended    these    dis-  XIX. 
courses,"-  he  removed  from  Galilee,   and  came  to 
the  confines  of  Judaea  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan. 
(2)  And  great  multitudes  folio  wed.  after  him,  and     2 
he  healed  them  there.     (3)   And  Pharisees  came     3 
to  him,  and  tempted  him  and  said:    Is  it  lawful 
for  a  man  to  divorce  his  wife  for  eveiy  cause? 
(4)  And  he  answered  and  said  to  them  :   Have  ye     4 
not  read,  that  he  who  made  [them]  at  the  begin- 
ning, made  them  a  male  and  a  female  ?     (5)  And     5 
he  said :    For  this  reason,  a  man  shall  leave  his 
father  and  his  mother,  and   adhere  to  his  wife ; 
and  they  two  shall  be  one  flesh.     (6)  Wherefore     6 
they  were  not  two,  but  one  flesh.      What  there- 
fore  God  hath  united,  let  not  man  sunder.      (7)     7 
They  say  to  him :   AVhy  then  did  Closes  command 


MATTHEW,    XIX. 


37 


to  give  u  billb  of  divorce,  and  to  put  lier  away? 

8  (8)  He  said  to  them:  Moses,  on  account  of  the 
hardness  of  your  heart,  permitted  you  to  divorce 
your  wives:  but  from  the  beginning  it  was  not  so. 

9  (9)  And  I  sny  to  you,  That  whoever  leaveth  his 
wife  not  being  an  adulteress,  and  taketh^^  another, 
committeth  adulter}'.      And  whoever   taketh  her 

10  that  is  divorced,  committeth  adultery.  (10)  His 
disciples  say  to  him :  If  such  is  the  case  between 
man  and  wife,  it  is  not  expedient  to  take  a  wife. 

11  (11)  But  he  said  to  them:  Not  every  one  is  ca- 
pable of  that  thing, 'J  but  he  only  to  whom  it  is 

12  given.  (12)  For  there  are  some  eunuchs,  born  so 
from  their  mother's  womb  ;  and  there  are  some 
eunuchs,  who  were  made  eunuchs  by  men  ;  and 
there  are  some  eunuchs  who  have  made  themselves 
eunuchs  for  the  sake  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
He  that  can  be  contented  let  him  be  contented. 

13  Then  they  brought  children^  to  him,  that  he 
might  lay   his  hand  upon  them  and  pray.     And 

1-1  his  disciples  rebuked  them.  (14)  But  Jesus  said 
to  them :  Allow  children  to  come  to  me,  and  for- 
bid them  not;   for  of  those  that  are  like  them  is 

15  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  (15)  And  he  laid  his 
hand  upon  them,  and  departed  from  there. 

16  And  one  came,  drew  near,  and  said  to  him  : 
Good  Teacher, f  what  good  thing  must  I  do,  that 

17  eternal  life  may  be  mine?  (17)  And  he  said  to 
him  :  Why  callest  thou  me  good  ?  There  is  none 
good,  except  one,  [namely,]  God.  But  if  thou 
wouldst  enter  into  life,?  keep  the  commandments.^ 

18  (18)  He  said  to  him.  Which?  And  Jesus  said  to 
him:  Thou  shalt  not  kill ;  and  thou  shalt  not  com- 
mit adultery  ;  and  tliou  shalt  not  steal ;  and  thou 

19  shalt  not  bear  false  testimony;  (19)  and  honor  thy 
father  and  thy  mother;    and  thou  shalt  love  thy 

20  neighbor  as  thyself.  (20)  The  young  man  saith 
to  iiim  :  All  these  have  I  kept  from  my  childhood. 

21  What  do  I  lack?  (21)  Jesus  saith  to  him:  If 
thou  desirest  to  be  perfect,'  go,  sell  thy  property, 
and  give  to  the  poor;  and  there  shall  be^  for  thee 
a  treasure  in  heaven  ;    and  come  thou  after  me. 

22  (22)  And  the  young  man  heard  that  speech, ^  and 
he  went  away  in  sadness;  for  he  had  much  proper- 

23  ty.  (23)  And  Jesus  said  to  his  disciples :  Verily 
I  say  to  you,  It  is  difficult  for  a  rich  man  to  enter 


■'  or,  xcriting. 


or,  marricth. 


''or,  word. 


Sy-llX^ 


P  Sy.  ].»_K. 

'■  Sy.  IJj.COS 


•  Sy.  1;^!^ 

^  or,  thou  shalt 
have. 


'  or,  word. 


38 


MATTHEW,    XX. 


'"  Sy.  can  live. 

°  Gr.  Peler. 

°  or,  shall  be  to 
us? 


r  Sy. 

Mr- 

'  or,  rule. 

*  %•  li^?, 

about  15 J 
cents. 

''  About  9  A.  M. 
'  Noon,  and  3 

P.M. 

''  About  5  r.  M. 


eSy. 


24 


25 


20 


30 


into  tlio  kingdom  of  heaven.  (24)  And  again,  I 
say  to  you :  It  is  easier  for  a  camel  to  enter  tlic 
aperture  of  a  needle,  than  for  a  rich  man  to  enter 
the  kingdom  of  God.  (25)  And  when  the  disci- 
ples heard  [it],  they  wondered  greatly,  and  said: 
Who  then  can  attain  to  life  !"»  (26)  Jesus  looked  26 
on  them,  and  said  to  them:  "With  men  this  is  not 
practicable,  but  with  God  every  thing  is  practi- 
cable. (27)  Then  answered  Cephas,"  and  said  to  27 
him :  Lo,  we  have  forsaken  every  thing,  and  come 
after  thee:  what  therefore  shall  we  receive?"  (28)  28 
JesLis  said  to  them :  Verily  I  say  to  you,  that,  as 
for  you  who  have  followed  me,  when  the  Son  of 
man  shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  his  glory  in  the 
new  world, P  ye  also  shall  sit  on  twelve  seats,  and 
shall  judge""  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  (29)  And 
every  man  that  relinquisheth  houses,  or  brothers 
or  sisters,  of  father  or  mother,  or  wife  or  children, 
or  lands,  for  my  name's  sake,  shall  receive  an 
hundredfold,  and  shall  inherit  eternal  life.^  (30) 
But  there  are  many  first  who  shall  be  last,  and 
last  [who  shall  be]  first.  (XX.)  For  the  kingdom  XX, 
of  heaven  is  like  a  man,  the  lord  of  a  house,  who 
went  out,  at  dawn  of  day,  to  hire  laborers  for  his 
vineyard.  (2)  And  he  contracted  with  the  labor-  2 
ers  for  a  denarius^'  a  day:  and  sent  them  into  his 
vineyard.  (3)  And  he  went  out  at  the  third  hour,^  2 
and  saw  others  standing  idle  in  the  market-place : 
(4)  and  lie  said  to  them,  Go  ye  also  into  my  vine-  4 
yard,  and  what  is  right  I  will  give  you ;  (5)  and  {; 
they  went.  And  again  he  went  out  at  the  sixth 
and  ninth  hours, *=  and  did  the  same.  (6)  And 
about  the  eleventh  hour,'^  he  went  out  and  found 
others  who  were  standing  and  idle ;  and  he  said  to 
them :  Why  stand  ye  all  the  day,  and  are  idle  ? 
(7)  They  say  to  him,  Because  no  one  hath  hired 
us.  lie  saith  to  them:  Go  ye  also  into  the  vine- 
yard ;  and  what  is  right  ye  shall  receive.  (8)  And 
wh(!n  it  was  evening,  the  lord  of  the  vineyard  said 
to  his  steward  :<=  Call  the  laborers,  and  give  them 
their  wages ;  and  commence  with  the  last,  and 
proceed  to  the  first.  (9)  And  those  of  the  eleventh 
hour  came,  and  received  each  a  denarius.  (10) 
And  when  the  first  came,  they  supposed  they 
should  receive  more ;  but  they  also  received  each 
a  denarius.      (1 1)  And   when   they  received   [it]. 


6 


9 
10 


11 


MATTHEW,   XX. 


39 


they  murmured  against  the  lord  of  the  house, 
12  (12)  and  said :  These  last  have  labored  but  one 
hour,  and  thou  hast  made  them  equal  with  us  who 
liave  borne  the  burden  of  the  day  and  the  heat  of 
it,  (13)  But  he  answered,  and  said  to  one  of 
them:  M}^  friend,  I  do  thee  no  injustice:  was  it  not 
for  a  denarius  that  thou  didst  contract  with  me? 
(14)  Take  Avhat  belongeth  to  tliee,  and  go :  for  I 
am  disposed  to  give  to  this  last,  as  to  thee.  (15) 
Is  it  not  lawful  for  me,  to  do  what  I  please  with 
what  belongeth  to  me ;  or  is  thy  eye  evil,^  be- 
cause I  am  good?s  (16)  Thus  the  "last  shall  be 
first,  and  the  first  last :  for  the  called  are  many, 
but  the  chosen  are  few.   ' 

And  Jesus  was  about  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem : 
and  he  took  his  twelve  disciples  aside,  on  the  way, 
and  said  to  them :  (18)  Behold,  we  arc  going  to 
Jerusalem;  and  the  Son  of  man  will  be  delivered- 
up  to  the  chief  priestsii  and  to  the  Scribes,  and  tliey 
will  condemn  him  to  death.  (19)  And  they  will  de- 
liver him  over  to  the  Gentiles:'  and  they  will  mock 
him,  and  will  scourge  him,  and  will  crucify  him ; 
and  the  third  day,  he  will  arise.  (20)  Then  came 
to  him  the  mother  of  Zebedee's  children,  she  and 
her  sons;  and  she  worshipped  him,  and  asked 
something  from  him.  (21)  And  he  said  to  her, 
What  desirest  thou?  She  said  to  him :  Say,  that 
these  my  two  sons  shall  sit,  the  one  on  thy  right 
hand  and  the  other  on  thy  left,  in  thy  kingdom. 

22  (22)  Jesus  answered  and  said :  Ye  know  not  what 
ye  ask  for.  Can  ye  drink  of  the  cup,  of  which  I 
am  to  drink?  or  be  baptized!^  with  the  baptism,' 
that  I  am  baptized  with?     They  sa}^  to  liim:    We 

23  can.  (23)  He  saith  to  them:  Ye  will  [indeed]  drink 
of  my  cup,  and  will  be  baptized  with  the  baptism 
that  I  am  baptized  with :  but  that  ye  should  sit  on 
my  right  hand  and  on  my  left,  is  not  mine  to  give, 
except  to  those  for  whom  it  is  prepared  by  my 

24  Father.     (21)  And  when  the  ten  heard  [it],  they 

25  were  angry  against  the  two  brothers.  (25)  And 
Jesus  called  them,  and  said  to  them :  Ye  know 
that  the  princes'"  of  the  nations  are  their  lords,  and 
their  great  men"  exercise  authority  over  them. 

26  (26)  Not  so  shall  it  be  among  you.  But  whoever 
among  you  desireth  to  be  great,   let  him  be  to 

27  you,  a  ministerer :»  (27)  and  whoever  among  you 


13 


14 

15 


16 


17 


18 


19 


20 


21 


'  ].  e.  envious. 
s  i.  e.  ffenerous. 


Sy.  ]CnV^s\ 


■^  Sy.  ^,vns; 

'  Sy. 


"Sy, 
"Sy. 


'Sy. 


40 


MATTHEW,    XXL 


Sy.  1,0V. 
Sy.  |j_o5a£3 

Sy.  gave  voice. 


>  Sy. 

''  or,  7iear  to. 


'  Sy.  ff  mulli- 
tude  of  throngs. 


<•  Sy.  jj-L^ol 

'  i.  p.  places,  or 
</ie  lieavens. 


dcsireth  to  be    first,   let  him    be   your   servant:? 
(28)   even   as  the   Son  of  man  came,   not  to  be  28 
served,  but  to  serve ;  and  to  give  his  life  a  ransom'' 
for  many. 

And  as  Jesus  passed  out  of  Jericho,   a  great  29 
multitude  followed  him.     (80)  And  lo,  two  blind  30 
men  were  sitting  by  the  way  side.     And  when 
they  heard  that  Jesus  was  passing,  they  called  out,^ 
and  said :  Have  compassion  on  us,  my  Lord,  thou 
son  of  David!     (31)  And  the  multitudes  rebuked  31 
them,  that  they  might  be  silent.     But  they  raised 
their  voice  the  more,   and  said:  Our  Lord,  have 
compassion  on  us,  thou  son  of  David.     (32)  And  32 
Jesus  stopped,  and  called  them,  and  said:  What 
wish  ye,  that  I  should  do  for  you?     (33)  They  33 
said  to  him :    Our  Lord,  that  our  eyes  may  be 
opened.     (34)  And  he  had  compassion  on  them,  34 
and  touched  their   eyes:    and  immediately  their 
eyes  were  opened,  and  they  followed  him. 


And  as  he  approached  Jerusalem,  and  came    XXI 
to   Bethphagejii    by   the  side^   of  the   mount   of 
Olives,  Jesus  sent  two  of  his  disciples;  (2)  and  said     2 
to  them :  Go  into  this  village  which  is  over  against 
you,  and  directly  ye  will  find  an  ass  tied,  and  a 
colt  with  her.      Untie  and    bring  [them]   to   me. 
(3)  And  if  any  man  say  ought  to  you,  tell  him,     i 
That  they  are  needed  by  our  Lord :  and  at  once  he 
will  send  them  hither.     (4)  Now  this  whole  occur-     -J 
rence  was,  that  so  might  be  fulfilled  that  which 
was  spoken  by  the  prophet,  saying:  (5)  Tell  ye     I 
the  daughter  of  Sion,  Behold,  th}'-  king  cometh  to 
thee,  meek,  and  riding  on  an  ass,  and  on  a  colt  the 
foal  of  an  ass.    (6)  And  the  disci])les  went,  and  did 
as  Jesus  commanded  them.    (7)  And  they  brought 
the  ass  and  the  colt.     And  they  placed  their  gar- 
ments on  the  colt,  and  set  Jesus  upon  it.     (8)  And 
a  very  great  throng^  strewed  their  clothes  in  the 
path ;  and  others  cut  branches  from  the  trees,  and 
cast  them   in   the  path.     (0)  And  the  multitudes 
that  went  before  him,  and  that  followed  after  him, 
shouted  and  said:  Ilosanna''  to  the  son  of  David  : 
Blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord: 
Ilosanna  in  the  highest.^     (10)  And  as  he  entered  10 
Jerusalem,  the  whole  city  was  in  commotion;  and 
they  said,  Who  is  this?     (11)  And  the  multitudes  11 


9 


MATTHEW,  XXI. 


41 


said,  This  is  Jesus  the  prophet,  who  is  from  Naza- 

12  reth  of  Galilee.  (12)  And  Jesus  entered  into  the 
temple  of  God,  and  expelled  all  them  that  bought 
and  sold  in  the  temple,  and  overset  the  counters 
of  the  money-brokers,  and  the  seats  of  them  that 

13  sold  doves.  (13)  And  he  said  to  them:  It  is  writ- 
ten, my  house  shall  be  called  the  house  of  prayer ;  | 

14  but  ye  have  made  it  a  den  of  robbers.  (14)  And 
there  came  to  him  in  the  temple  the  blind  and  the 

15  lame ;  and  he  healed  them.  (15)  And  when  the 
chief  priests  and  Pharisees  saw  the  wonderful 
things  which  he  performed,  and  the  children 
shouting  in  the  temple  and  saying,  Hosanna  to 
the  son  of  David,  their  indignation  was  excited. 

16  (16)  And  they  said  to  him:  Hearest  thou  what 
these  are  saying?  Jesus  said  to  them:  Yes. 
Have  ye  never  read,  Ont  of  the  mouth  of  children 

17  and  infants  thou  hast  acquired  praise?  (17)  And 
he  left  them,  and  retired  out  of  the  city  to  ]3ethany,f 

18  and  lodged  there.     (18)  And  in  the  morning,  when 

19  he  returned  to  the  city,  he  was  hungry.  (ID)  And 
he  saw  a  fig-tree  by  the  way,  and  came  to  it  and 
found  nothing  on  it,  except  leaves  only.  And  he 
said  to  it:  There  shall  no  more  be  fruit  on  thee 
for  ever.g    And  immediately  the  fig-tree  withered. 

20  (20)  And  the  disciples  saw  [it],  and  admired,  and 
said:   How  suddenly  hath   the  fig-tree  withered! 

21  (21)  Jesus  re])lied  and  said  to  them :  Verily  I  say 
to  you,  That  if  there  be  fiiith  in  you,  and  ye  shall 
not  doubt,  ye  may  not  only  do  this  thing  of  the 
fig-tree,  but  also  if  ye  shall  say  to  this  mountain, 
be  thou  lifted  up,  and  foil  into  the  sea,  it  will  be  so. 

22  (22)  And  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  prayer,  and 

23  shall  believe,  ye  shall  receive.  (23)  And  when 
Jesus  came  to  the  temple,  the  chief  priests  and 
the  Elders^  of  the  people  came  to  him  as  lie  was 
teaching,  and  said  to  him:  By  what  authority 
doest  thou  these  things?    And  who  gave  thee  this 

24  authority  ?  (24)  Jesus  replied  and  said  to  them : 
I  also  will  ask  you  one  question,'  and  if  ye  Avill 
tell  me,  I  also  will  tell  you  by  what  authority  I  do 

25  these  things.     (25)  The  baptism"^  of  John,   from 
whence  was   it?     From    heaven,    or   from    men?!  lAli?oViS^n 
And  they  reasoned  among  themselves,!  and  said: 

If  we  should  say,  From  heaven;  he  will  say  to  us,  '  or,  with  them- 

26  Why  did  ye  not  believe  in  him?     (26)  And  if  wej 


Sy. 

(lis  AjlO 


gSy    V^\v\ 


Sy.  \jL 


or,  word. 


Sy 


selves. 


42 


MATTHEW,    XXI. 


Sy.  ]lQjb 


or,  parable. 


Sy.  badly,  bad- 
ly. 


should  say,  From  men  ;  we  are  afraid  of  the  multi- 
tude, for  they  all  hold  John  as  a  prophet.     (27)  27 
And  ihey  answered,  and  said  to  him :   We  do  not 
know.     Jesus  said  to  them :  Neither  do  I  tell  you 
by  what  authority  I  do  these  things.     (28)  But  28 
how  appeareth   it  to  you?     A  certain  man  had 
two  sons;  and  he  came  to  the  first  and  said  to 
him,  My  son,  go,  labor  to-day  in   the  vineyard. 
(29)  And  he  answered  and  said,  I  am  not  willing.  29 
I3ut  afterwards  he  repented  and  went.     (30)  And  30 
he  came  to  the  other,  and  said  the  same  to  him. 
And  he  answered  and  said:  I  [go],  my  lord;  but 
did  not  go.     (31)  Which  of  these  two  performed  31 
the  pleasure  of  his  father?     They  say  to  him,  The 
first.     Jesus  said  to  them :   Verily  I  say  to  you', 
That  publicans  and  harlots  go  before  you  into  the 
kingdom  of  God.     (32)  For  John  came  to  you  in  32 
the  way  of  righteousness,™  and  ye  believed  him 
not;  but  the  publicans  and  harlots  believed  him: 
and  ye,  after  ye  had  seen  [it],  did  not  even  then 
repent  and  believe  in  him.     (33)  Hear  ye  another  33 
similitude."     A  certain  man,  the  lord  of  a  house, 
planted  a  vineyard,  and  inclosed  it  with  a  hedge, 
and  digged  in  it  a  wine-press,  and  built  a  tower  in 
it,  and  leased  it  to  cultivators,  and  removed  to  a 
distance.     (3-1)  And  when  the  time  for  the  fruits  34 
arrived,  he   sent  his   servants  to  the  cultivators, 
that  they  might  remit  to  him  of  the  fruits  of  the 
vineyard.     (35)  And  the  cultivators  laid  hold  of  35 
his   servants,  and  beat  one,  and  stoned  another, 
and   one   they  slew.      (36)    And   again    he    sent  36 
other  servants,  more  numerous  than  the  first ;  and 
they  did  the  like  to  them.     (37)  And  at  last  he  sent  37 
to  them  his  son  :    for  he  said,  Perha})s  they  will 
respect  my  son.      (38)  But  the  cultivators,  when  38 
they  saw  the  son,  said  among  themselves :  This  is 
the  heir :  Come ;  let  us  kill  him,  and  retain  his 
inheritance.      (39)   And  they  laid   hold   of  him,  39 
thrust  liim  out  of  the  vineyard,   and  slew  him. 

(40)  When  the  lord  of  the  vineyard,   therefore,  40 
shall  come ;  what  will  he  do  to  those  cultivators  ? 

(41)  They  say  to  him :   lie  will   utterly"  destroy  41 
them;  and  will  lease  the  vinc3^ard  to  otiier  culti- 
vators, wlio  will   render   him   the   fruits  in  their 
seasons.     (42)  Jesus  said  to  them  :  Have  ye  never  42 
read  in  the  scripture,  The  stone  which  the  builders 


MATTHEW,    XXII. 


43 


rejected,  batli  become  the  Lead  of  the  corner :  thjs 
is  from  the  Lord ;  and  it  is  marvellous  in  our  eyes  ? 

43  .  (43)  Therefore  I  say  to  you,  That  the  kingdom  of 

(jod  shall  be  taken  from  jou,  and  shall  be  given 

44  to  a  people  that  will  yield  fruits,  p  (44)  And  who- 
ever shall  fall  upon  this  stone,  will  be  fractured; 
but  on  whomsoever  it  shall  fall,  it  will  crush  him 

45  to  atoms  ?  ""  (45)  And  when  the  chief  priests  and 
Pharisees  had  heard  his  similitudes, ^  they  under- 

46  stood  that  he  spoke  in  reference  to  them.  (46)  And 
they  sought  to  apprehend  him,  but  were  afraid 
of  the  multitude,  because  tliey  accounted  him  as  a 
prophet. 

XXII.     And  Jesus  answered  again  by  similitudes,  ^ 

2  and  said :  (2)  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  to 
a  royal  person,  who   made  a  feastt"  for  his   son. 

3  (3)  And  he  sent  his  servants  to  call  those  that 
had  been  invited,  to  the  feast :  and  they  would  not 

4  come.  (4)  And  again  he  sent  other  servants,  and 
said  :  Tell  those  invited,  Behold,  my  entertainment 
is  prepared,  my  oxen  and  my  fatlings  are  slain, 
and  every  thing  is  prepared  ;  come  ye  to  the  feast. 

5  (5)  But  they  showed  contempt,  and  vfent  away, 
one  to  his  farm,  and  another  to  his  merchandise; 

6  (6)  and  the  I'est  seized  his  servants,  and  abused 

7  them,  and  slew  them.  (7)  And  Avhen  the  king 
heard  [of  it],  he  was  angry  ;  and  he  sent  his  military 
forces,  *=  and  destroyed  those  murderers,  and  burned 

8  their  city.  (8)  Then  said  he  to  his  servants,  The 
feast  is  prepared,  but  they  who  were  invited  were 

9  unworthy.  (9)  Go  ye  therefore  to  the  termina- 
tions of  the  streets ;  and  as  many  as  ye  tind,  bid 

10  to  the  feast.  (10)  And  those  servants  went  out 
into  the  streets,  and  collected  all  they  found,  both 
bad  and  good ;  and  the  place  of  feasling**  was  filled 

11  with  guests.  (11)  And  the  king  went  in  to  see 
the  guests :   and  he  saw  there  a  man  who  was  not 

12  clad  in  the  festal  garments.  (12)  And  he  said  to 
him :   My  friend,  how  camest  thou  here  without  the 

13  festal  robes?  But  he  was  silent.  (13)  Then  said  the 
king  to  the  servitors:  Bind  his  hands  and  his  feet, 
and  cast  him  into  the  outer^  darkness :   there  will 

14  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth.  (14)  For  the 
called  are  many,  and  the  chosen  are  few. 

15  Then  went  the  Pharisees  and  took  counsel,  how 


p  Sy. 

"■  or,  scatter  him 
in  particles. 

"  or,  parables. 


'  or,  parables. 

'  or,  marriage- 
feast. 


or,  Ms  armies. 


'  Sy.  Aj^ 
UoAjbId 


'-  or,  outside. 


u 


MATTHEW,    XXII. 


^  Sy.  Axn:? 

>■  Sy.  U^Vo 


■Sy. 

•^  Sy.  ]j.g^\k? 


Sy. 


•"  or,  might, 
abiiUij. 


"  Sy. 

"Sy.  jioakij,; 

Gr.  vofji-off.        I 
P  Sy.  ]i  g^\Vn 


they  might  ensnare  him  in  discourse/     (16)  And  16 
they  sent  to  him  their  disciples,  with  domestics  of 
Herod,!?  and  said  to  him:  Teacher, ^  we  know  that 
thou  art  veracious,  and  teachest  the  way  of  God 
with  truth,  regardless  of  man,  for  thou  hast   no 
respect  of  persons.     (17)  Tell  us,  therefore,  how  17 
doth  it  appear  to  thee :  is  it  lawful  to  pay  cajiita- 
tion  money  to  Caesar,  or  not?    (18)  But  Jesus  knew  18 
their  wickedness,   and  said:   Why  tempt  ye  me, 
ye  hypocrites?     (19)  Show  me  a  denarius  of  the  19 
capitation  money.     And  they  brought  to  him  a 
denarius.     (20)  And  Jesus  said  to  them :  Whose  20 
is  this    image  and  inscription?      (21)    They  say,  21 
Caesar's.      He  saith  to  them :    Give  then  Cciesar's 
things  to  CiBsar,  and  God's  things  to  God.     (22)  22 
And  when  they  heard   [it]   the}^  were  surprised : 
and  they  left  him,  and  went  awa}'. 

The  same  day  came  Sadducees,  and  said  to  him  :  23 
There  is  no  life  of  the  dead.'    And  they  questioned 
him,  (2-1)  and  said  to  him:  Teacher ;k  Moses  com-  2-1 
manded  us,  that  if  a  man  should  die  childless,  his 
brother  must  take  his  wife  and  raise  up  seed  to 
his  brother.      (25)  Now  there  were  with  us  seven  25 
brothers.     The  lirst  took  a  wife,  and  deceased  ;  and, 
as  he  had  no  children,  he  left  his  wife  to  his  bro- 
ther.    (26)  In  like  manner  also  the  second,  and  26 
the  third,  and  up  to  the  whole  seven.     (27)  And  27 
after  them  all,  the  woman  also  herself  died.     (28)  28 
In  the  resurrection,!  therefore,  to  which  of  those 
seven  will  she  be  the  wife  ?    For  they  all  had  taken 
her?     (29)  Jesus  answered,  and  said  to  them:   Ye  29 
do  err,  from  not  kncjwing  the  scriptui'cs,  nor  the 
power™  of  God.  (30)  For  in  the  resurrection  of  the  30 
dead,  they  do  not  take  wives,  nor  are  Avives  given 
to  husbands;  but  they  are  as  the  angels  of  God  in 
heaven.     (31)  But  as  to  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  31 
have  ye  not  read  what  was  spoken  to  you  by  God, 
who  said:    (32)  I  am   the   God  of  Abraham,  the  32 
God  of  Isaac,  the  God  of  Jacob?     Now  he  is  not 
the  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living.     (33)  And  33 
when  the  multitude  heard  [it]  they  were  astonished 
at  his  doctrine." 

And  when  the  Pharisees  heard  that  he  had  put  34 
the  Sadducees  to  silence,  they  assembled  together ; 
(35)  and  one  of  them,  who  was  expert  in  the  law,"  35 
to  tempt  him,  inquired :  (36)  Teacher,?  which  is  the  36 


MATTHEW,    XXIII. 


45 


37  great  command  in  the  law  ?'"  (37)  Jesus  said  to  him : 
Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God,  with  all  thy  heart, 
and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  might, ^  and 

38  with  all  thy  mind.t     (38).  This  is  the  great  and  first 

39  command.     (39)  And  the  second,  which  is  like  it, 

40  is.  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as  thyself.  (40) 
On  these  two  commands  hang  the  law^  and  the 

41  prophets.      (41)    And  while   the   Pharisees   were 

42  assembled,  Jesus  questioned  them,  (42)  and  said: 
What  say  ye  respecting  the  Messiah  ?  Whose  son 
is    he?     They   say   to    him;  The    son   of  David. 

43  (43)  He  saith  to  them :  How  then  doth  David,  by 

44  the  Spirit,  call  him  Lord  ?  for  he  said :  (44)  The 
Lord  said  to  my  Lord,  Seat  thj'self  at  my  right 
hand,  until  I  place  thy  enemies   under   thy  feet. 

45  (45)  If  David  then  call  him  Lord,  how  is  he  his 

46  son?  (46)  And  no  one  was  able  to  give  him  an 
answer?  And  from  that  da}",  no  one  dared  to 
question  him. 

XXIII.     Then  Jesus  conversed  with  the   multitude 

2  and  with  his  disciples,  (2)  and  said  to  them : 
The  Scribes  and  Pharisees  sit  in  the  seat  of  Moses. 

3  (3)  AVhatever  therefore  they  tell  you  to  observe, 
that  observe  and  do.    But  according  to  their  deeds, 

4  practise  ye  not:  for  they  say,  and  do  not.  (4) 
They  tie  up  heavy  burdens,  and  lay  [them]  on 
men's  shoulders ;    but  will  not  themselves  touch 

5  them  with  their  finger.  (5)  And  all  their  works 
they  do,  to  be  seen  of  men :  for  they  make  their 
phylacteries^'  broad,  and   extend  the  fringes^  of 

6  their  garments.  (6)  And  they  love  the  highest 
couches  at  suppers,  <=  and  the  highest  seats  in  the 

7  synagogues,  (7)  and  the  greeting  in  the  market 
.     places,  and  to  be  addressed  by  men  with  Eabbi.'^ 

8  (8)  But  be  not  ye  called  Eabbi ;   for  one  is  your 

9  Eabbi,  and  ye  are  all  brethren.  (9)  And  ye  shall 
not  call  yourselves  Father^  on  earth ;    for  one  is 

10  your  Father,  who  is  in  heaven.  (10)  And  be  ye 
not  called  guides  ;f    for  one  is  your  Guide,  the 

11  Messiah.     (11)  And  the  great  one  among  you  will 

12  be  your  servitor, »  (12)  For  whoever  shall  exalt 
himself,  will  be  abased :  and  whoever  shall  abase 
himself,  will  be  exalted. 

13  Woe  to  you,  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites: 
for  ye  devour  the  houses  of  widows,  under  the  dis- 


■■  Sy.  ]mnVny 
Gr.  vofjioj. 

'  or,  strength. 

'  or,  reason. 

^  Sy.  lA.5ol, 
the  Pentateuch. 


Sy. 


'  Sy.  lAliZ 
or,  dinners. 
Sy.  ^x^j 
Sy.  H 

Sy.  IjfLylD, 
Lat.  duces. 

:  Sy. 


46 


MATTHEW,    XXIIl. 


Sy.  "JJOJL 


(JTl 


^ 


■^ 


Ol^ 


^  Sy.  a  debtor. 


Sy.  a  d.hlor. 


Sy.  ],£DCiLQJ 


guise  of  protracting  your  prayers.      Therefore  ye 
shall  receive  greater  condemnation.     (14)  Woe  to  14 
you,  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites :  for  ye  hold 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  closed  before  men ;  for  ye 
enter  not  yourselves,  and  those  that  would  enter 
ye  suffer  not  to  enter.     (15)  Woe  to  you,  Scribes  15 
and  Pharisees,  hypocrites:  for  ye  traverse  sea  and 
land  to  make  one  proselyte  ;h  and  when  he  is  gain- 
ed, ye  make  him  a  child  of  hell'  twofold  more 
than  yourselves.   (16)  Woe  to  you,  ye  blind  guides:  16 
for  ye  sa}'-,  Whoever  shall  swear  by  the  temple,  it 
is  nothing;  but  whoever  shall  swear  by  the  gold 
that  is  in  the  temple,  he  is  holden.^^     (17)  Ye  fools,  17 
and  blind :  for  which  is  greater,  the  gold,  or  the 
temple  that  sanctifieth  the  gold?     (18)  And,  v/ho-  18 
ever  shall  swear  by  the  altar,  it  is  nothing:  but 
whoever  shall  swear  by  the  oblation  upon  it,  he  is 
holden.i     (19)  Ye  fools,  and  blind :  for  Avhich  is  19 
greater,  the  oblation,  or  the  altar  that  sanctifieth 
the  oblation?     (20)  He  therefore  who  sweareth  by  20 
the  altar,  SAvcareth  by  it,  and  by  all  that  is  upon  it. 
(21)  And  he  who  sweareth  by  the  temple,  sweareth  21 
by  it,  and  by  him  that  dwelleth  in  it.      (22)  And  22 
he   who   sweareth   by   heaven,   sweareth  by   the 
throne  of  God,  and  by  him  that  sitteth  on  it.     (23)  23 
Woe  to  3'-ou,  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites :  for 
ye  tithe  mint,  and  anise,  and  cummin,  and  omit 
the  graver  [matters]  of  the  law,'"  judgment,  and 
mercy,   and  fidelity:   these  ought  ye  to  do,  and 
those  not  to  omit.     (24)  Ye  blind  guides,   who  24 
strain  out  gnats,  and  swallow  down  camels.     (25)  25 
Woe  to  you.  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites:  for 
ye  cleanse  the  outside  of  the  cup  and  the  dish, 
while  within  they  are  full  of  rapine  and  wicked- 
ness.    (26)  Ye  blind  Pharisees,  cleanse  first  the  20 
inside  of  the  cup  and  dish,  that  their  outside  may 
be  clean  also.   (27)  Woe  to  you,  Scribes  and  Phari-  27 
sees,  hypocrites :  for  ye  are  like  whitcd  sepulchres, 
which  appear  comely  without,  but  arc  within  full 
of  bones  of  the  dead  and  all  impurity.     (28)  So  ye  28 
also,  outwardly,  appear  to  men  as  righteous;"  but 
witliin,  ye  are  full  of  iniquity  and  hypocrisy.     (29)  29 
Woe  to  you.  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites  :  for 
ye  build  the  tombs  of  the  prophets,  and  ye  adorn 
the  sepulchres  of  the  righteous;  (30)  and  ye  say:  SO 
If  we  liad  been  in  the  days  of  our  fathers,  we 


MATTHEW,    XXIV. 


47 


would  not  have  been  participators  with  them  in 

31  the  blood  of  the  prophets.  (31)  Wherefore  ye 
are  witnesses,  against  yourselves,  that  ye  are  the 

32  children  of  them  that  killed  the  prophets.  (32) 
And  as  for  you,  fill  ye  up  the  measure  of  your 

33  fathers.     (33)  Ye  serpents,  ye  race  of  vipers:  how 
3-1  can  ye  escape  the  condemnation  of  hell?"     (31) 

Wherefore,  behold,  I  send  unto  you  prophets,  and 
wise  men,  and  scribes;  some  of  whom  ye  will  kill 
and  crucify,  and  some  of  them  ye  will  scourge  in 
your  synagogues,   and  will  persecute  them  from 

35  city  to  city :  (35)  so  that  on  you  may  come  all  the 
blood  of  the  righteous,  which  hath  been  shed  on 
the  earth,  from  the  blood  of  righteous  Abel  unto 
the  blood  of  Zachariah,P  son  of  Barachiab,  whom 

36  ye  slew  between  the  temple  and  the  altar.  (36) 
Verily  I  say  to  you,   that  all  these  things  will 

37  come  upon  this  generation.  (37)  0  Jerusalem, 
Jerusalem,  who  killest  the  prophets,  and  stonest 
them  that  are  sent  to  thee :  how  often  would  I 
liave  gathered  thy  children,  as  a  hen  gathereth 
her  3^oung  under  her  wings,  and  ye  would  not. 

38  (38)   Behold,  your  house  is  left  to  you  desolate ! 

39  (39)  For  I  say  to  you.  That  ye  shall  not  see  me 
henceforth,  until  ye  shall  say :  Blessed  is  he  that 
cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

XXIY.  And  Jesus  passed  out  of  the  temple  to  go 
away :  and  his  disciples  came  to  him,  showing  him 

2  the  structure^  of  the  temple.  (2)  And  he  said 
to  them:  See  ye  not  all  these?  Verily  I  say  to 
you,  There  will  not  be  left  here  a  stone  upon  a 

3  stone,  that  is  not  demolished.  (3)  And  as  Jesus 
sat  on  the  mount  of  Olives,  his  disciples  came,  and 
said  between  themselves  and  him :  Tell  us  when 
these  things  are  to  be ;  and  what  will  be  the  sign 
of  thy  coming,  b  and  of  the  consummation  of  the 

4  world.''-     (4)  Jesus  answered  and  said   to  them: 

5  Take  heed,  that  no  one  deceive  you.  (5)  For 
many  will  come  in  my  name,  and  will  say,  I  am 

6  the  Messiah:  and  they  will  deceive  many.  (6) 
And  ye  are  to  hear  of  conflicts,  and  the  rumor  of 
battles.  See  that  ye  be  not  disquieted :  for  all 
these  things  must  come ;  but  the  consummation  is 

7  not  yet.  (7)  For  nation  will  rise  against  nation, 
and  kingdom  against  kingdom  ;  and  there  will  be 


'Sy. 


Sy.  Oil  1 1  O 


Sy.  ^A^Z]iD 

Sy.  ]vn\s 


48 


MATTHEW,    XXIV. 


"  Sy.  "Uj 

<=  Sy.  ]Vn\v 
'  Sy.  Ik^dj 


s  Sy.  ]Vo\s 

'■Sy.loOl'Ujo 


8 
9 

10. 

11 

12 


flimines,  and  pestilences,  and  earthquakes  in  divers 
places.  (8)  But  all  these  are  only  the  commence- 
ment of  sorrows.  (9)  And  they  will  deliver  you 
up  to  tribulation,  and  will  kill  you :  and  ye  will  be 
hated  by  all  nations,  on  account  of  my  name.  (10) 
Then  many  will  be  stumbled :  and  they  will  hate 
one  another,  and  will  betray  one  another.  (11) 
And  many  false  prophets  will  rise  up ;  and  they 
will  deceive  many.  (12)  And  on  account  of  the 
abounding  of  iniquity,  the  love  of  many  will  de- 
cline. (18)  But  he  that  shall  persevere  to  the  end,  13 
will  have  life.^  (14)  And  this  announcement  of  14 
the  kingdom  shall  be  published  in  all  the  world,e 
for  a  testimony  to  all  nations:  and  then  will  come 
the  consummation.^  (15)  And  when  ye  see  the 
abominable  sign  of  desolation,  which  was  spoken 
of  by  Daniel  the  prophet,  standing  in  the  holy 
place ;  then  let  the  reader  consider ;  (16)  and  then 
let  them  who  are  in  Judaea,  flee  to  the  mountain : 
(17)  and  let  him  who  is  on  the  roof,  not  come 
down  to  take  what  is  in  his  house :  (18)  and  let 
him  who  is  in  the  field,  not  return  back  to  take 
his  clothing.  (19)  But  woe  to  those  with  child,  and  19 
to  them  that  are  nursing,  in  those  days.  (20)  And  20 
pray  ye,  that  your  flight  be  not  in  winter,  or  on 
the  sabbath.  (21)  For  there  will  then  be  great 
distress,  such  as  hath  not  been  from  the  commence- 
ment of  the  world,  &  until  now,  and  wall  not  be. 
(22)  And  unless  those  days  should  be  cut  short,  no  22 
flesh  would  remain  alive. *>  But,  for  the  elect's 
sake,  those  days  will  be  cut  short.  (23)  Then,  if  23 
any  one  shall  say  to  you,  Lo,  the  Messiah  is  here, 
or  is  there ;  give  no  credence.  (24)  For  there  will 
arise  false  Messiahs,  and  mendacious  prophets ;  who 
will  exhibit  great  signs,  so  as  to  deceive,  if  possible, 
even  the  elect.  (25)  Behold,  I  have  told  you 
beforehand.  (26)  If  therefore  they  say  to  you. 
Behold,  he  is  in  the  desert;  go  not  out:  or, 
Behold,  he  is  in  a  secret  chamber ;  give  no  credence. 
(27)  As  the  lightning  cometh  out  of  the  cast,  and  27 
shineth  unto  the  west,  so  will  be  the  coming  of  the 
Son  of  man.  (28)  And  wherever  the  carcass  may 
be,  there  will  the  eagles  be  congregated.  (29)  And 
immediately  after  the  distress  of  those  days,  the 
sun  will  be  darkened,  and  the  moon  will  not  show 
her  light,  and  the  stars  Avill  fall  fi'om  heaven,  and 


15 


16 

17 
18 


21 


24 


25 
26 


28 
29 


MATTHEW,    XXIV. 


49 


30  the  powers'  of  heaven  will  be  agitated.  (30)  And 
then  will  be  seen  the  signal^^  of  the  Son  of  man  in 
heaven:  and  then  will  all  the  tribes  of  the  earth 
moarn,  when'  they  see  the  Son  of  man  coming  on 
the  clouds  of  heaven,  with  power  and  great  glory. 

31  (31)  And  he  will  send  his  angels  with  a  great 
trumpet,  and  they  will  collect  together  his  elect 
from  the  four  winds,  from  one  extremity  of  heaven 

32  to  the  other.  (32)  And  learn  ye  an  illustration"' 
from  the  fig-tree.  As  soon  as  its  branches  become 
tender  and  its  leaves  shoot  forth,  ye  know  that 

33  summer  is  coming  on.  (33)  So  also  ye,  when  ye 
perceive  all  these  things,  know  ye,  that  he  is  nigh 

31  [even]  at  the  door.  (34)  Verily  I  say  to  you,  Thaf 
this  generation'!  shall  not  pass  away,  till  all  these 

35  things  shall  he.     (35)  Heaven  and  earth  will  pass 

36  away;  but  my  words°  shall  not  pass  away.  (36) 
But  of  that  day  and  of  that  hour,  knoweth  no  man, 
nor  even  the  angels  of  heaven,  but  the  Father  only. 

37  (37)  And  as  the  days  of  Noah,  so  will  the  coming 

38  of  the  Son  of  man  be.  (38)  For  as,  before  the 
flood,?  they  were  eating  and  drinking,  taking 
wives  and  giving  to  husbands,  up  to  the  day  that 

39  Noah  entered  the  ark/  (39)  and  knew  not,  until 
the  flood  came  and  took  them  all  away;  so  will 

40  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man  be.  (40)  Then  will 
two  [men]  be  in  the  field ;  the  one  will  be  taken, 

41  and  the  other  left.  (41)  Two  [women]  will  be 
grinding  at  the  mill ;  the  one  taken,  and  the  other 

42  left.     (42)  Watch,  therefore,  since  ye  know  not  at 

43  what  hour  your  Lord  cometh.  (43)  But  know 
this,  that  if  the  lord^  of  the  house  had  known  in 
what  watch  the  thief  would  come,  he  would  have 
been  aAvake,  and  would  not  have  suffered  his  house 

44  to  be  broken  into.  (44)  Therefore,  be  ye  also 
ready ;  for  at  an  hour  ye  do  not  expect,  the  Son  of 

45  man  will  come.  (45)  Who  then,  is  that  faithful 
and  wise  servant,  whom  his  lord  hath  placed  over 
his  domestics,*  to  give  them  their  food  in  its  time? 

46  (46)  Happy  is  that  servant,  whpm,  when  his  lord 

47  shall  come,  he  will  find  so  doing.  (47)  Verily  I 
say  to  you.  He  will  place  him  over  all  that  he  hath. 

48  (48)  But  if  that  servant,  being  wicked,  shall  say  in 

49  his  heart.  My  lord  delayeth  his  coming ;  (49)  and 
shall  begin  to  beat  his  fellow-servants,  and  shall  be 

50  eating  and  drinking  with  drunkards ;  (50)  the  lord 


or,  armies. 
^  Sy.  "[...aj 

or,  and  they 
will. 


Sy.UU 


£i 


or,  race, 
o  Sy.  .,\V) 


Sy.  "[j^a^ 
Sy.  ]JaD 


or,  master. 


'Sy. 


50 


MATTHEW,    XXV, 


Sy.  likened  to. 


or,  power. 


or,  olliers. 


of  that  servant  will  come  in  a  day  he  will  not  ex- 
pect, and  in  an  hour  he  knoweth  not,  (51)  and  will  51 
cut  him  asunder,  and  will  assign  him  his  portion 
with  the  hypocrites :    there  will  be  weeping  and 
gnashing  of  teeth. 

Then    may    the    kingdom    of  heaven    be  XXV, 
shadowed=i  forth  by  ten   virgins,  who  took  their 
lamps  and  went  out  to  meet  the  bridegroom  and 
bride.     (2)  And  five  of  them  were  wise,  and  five     2 
were  foolish,      (3)    And    the   foolish   took  their     3 
lamps,  but  took  no  oil  with  them,     (4)  But  the     4 
wise  took  oil  in  vessels,  with  their  lamps.    (5)  And     5 
while  the  bridegroom  delayed,   they  all  became 
sleepy  and  fell  asleep.     (6)  And  at  midnight  there     6 
was  an  outcry :  Behold,  the  bridegroom  cometh ; 
go  yo  out  to  meet  him,     (7)  Then  all  those  virgins     7 
arose,   and   trimmed   their   lamps.     (8)  And   the     8 
foolish  said  to  the  wise :  Give  us  of  your  oil ;  for, 
behold,  our  lamps  have  gone  out.     (9)  The  wise     9 
answered  and  said^  [We  mnst  refuse,]  lest  there 
should  not  be  enough  for  us  and  for  you:  but  go 
ye   to   them   that   sell,   and   buy   for  yourselves, 
(10)  And  while  they  went  to  buy,  the  bridegroom  10 
came;  and  they  that  were  ready,  went  with  him 
into  the  house  of  the  nuptials,  and  the  door  was 
shut,      (11)  And  at  length  came  also  the  other  11 
virgins,  and  said:  Our  lord,  our  lord,  open  to  us. 
(12)  But  he  answered,  and  said  to  them:  Verily  12 
I  say  to  you,  I  know  you  not.     (13)  Watch,  there-  13 
fore,  seeing  ye  know  not  the  day  nor  the  hour. 

(14)  For,  as  a  man  that  took  a  journey,  called  his  14 
servants   and    delivered    to    them   his   property : 

(15)  to  one  he  gave  live  talents;  to  another,  two;  15 
ana  to  another,  one :  to  each,  according  to  his 
ability:^  and  he  immediately  departed.  (16)  Then  16 
he  that  received  live  talents,  went  and  traded  with 
them,  and  gained  five  more.^  (17)  And  likewise 
the  one  of  two  [talents],  by  trading  gained  two 
more.  (18)  But  he  that  received  one,  went  and 
digged  in  the  earth,   and  hid  his  lord's  money. 

(19)  And  after  a  long  time,  the  lord  of  those  ser- 
vants  came,    and   received    account    from  them. 

(20)  And  he  who  had  received  the  five  talents,  20 
came  and  brought  five  others ;  and  said,  My  lord, 
thou  gavcst  me  five  talents ;  behold,  I  have  gained 


17 

18 


19 


MATTHEW,    XXV. 


51 


21  by  trading  five  more  to  tliem.  (21)  His  lord  said 
to  him:  Well  donel^  good  and  feitliful  servant: 
thou  hast  been  faithful  with  a  little;  I  will  set 
thee  over  much:  enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy 

22  lord.  (22)  And  he  of  the  two  talents  came,  and 
said :  My  lord,  thou  gavest  me  two  talents ;  be- 
hold, I  have  by  trading  gained  two  more  to  them. 

23  (23)  His  lord  said  to  him :  Well  done !  good  and 
faithful  servant:  thou  hast  been  faithful  with  a 
little  ;  I  will  set  thee  over  much :  enter  thou  into 

24:  the  joy  of  thy  lord.  (21)  And  he  also  that  re- 
ceived the  one  talent,  came  and  said :  My  lord,  I 
knew  thee,  that  thou  art  a  hard  man,  reaping 
where  thou  hast  not  soAved,  and  gathering  where 

25  thou  hast  not  scattered ;  (25)  and  I  was  afraid,  and 
I  went  and  hid  thy  talent  in  the  earth.     Behold, 

26  thou  hast  what  is  thine.  (26)  His  lord  answered, 
and  said  to  him :  AVicked  and  slothful  servant ! 
Thou  knewest  me,  that  I  reap  where  I  have  not 
sowed,  and  gather  where  I  have  not  scattered ! 

27  (27)  Thou  oughtest  to  have  cast  my  money  into 
the  exchange;*'  and  I  might  have  come  and  de- 

28  manded  my  property  with  its  interest.^'  (28)  Take 
therefore  the  talent  from  him,  and  give  it  to  him 

29  that  hath  ten  talents..  (29)  For,  to  him  that  hath, 
shall  be  given,  and  he  shall  have  more ;  but  from 
him  that  hath  not,  even  what  he  hath  shall  be 

30  taken  away,  (30)  And  cast  ye  the  unprofitable 
servant  into  the  outer  darkness :  there  will  be 
weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth. 

31  And  when  the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  his 
glory,  and  all  his  holy  angels  with  him,  then  will 

32  iie  sit  upon  the  throne  of  his  glory.  (32)  And 
before  him  will  be  gathered  all  nations ;  and  he 
will  separate  them  one  from  another,  as  a  shepherd 

33  severeth  the  sheep  from  the  goats.  (33)  And  he 
will  place  the  sheep  on  his  right  hand,  and  the 

31  goats  on  his  left.  (31)  Then  will  the  king  say  to 
those  on  his  right  hand :  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my 
Father ;  inherit  the  kingdom  that  Avas  prepared  for 

35  you  from  the  foundation  of  the  world. s  (35)  For  I 
was  hungry,  and  ye  gave  me  food ;  I  was  thirsty, 
and  ye  gave  me  drink ;  I  was  a  stranger,  and  ye 

36  took  me  home ;  (36)  I  was  naked,  and  ye  clothed 
me;    I  was  sick,  and  ye  visited  me;    I  was  in 

37  prison,h  and  ye  came  to  me.     (37)  Then  will  the 


<"  Sy.  Qui  = 
Eu! 


Sy.  "IjoAa 

Sy.  OlALlLJ 


GSy.  ]Vn\v 


•>  or,  house  of 
prisoners. 


52 


MATTHEW,    XXVI. 


»>  Sy.     |jl>j 


•■  Sy.  "jg^in 


righteous  say  to  him:  Oar  Lord,   when  saw  we 
thee  hungry,  and  fed  thee?  or  thirsty,  and  gave 
thee   drink?      (38)    And   when    «aw   we   thee   a  38 
stranger,    and   took   thee   home?    or  naked,   and 
ch)thed  thee?     (39)  And  when  saw  we  thee  sick,  89 
or  in  prison,  and  came  to  thee?     (40)  And  the  40 
king  will  answer,  and  say  to  them:  Verily  I  say 
to  3''ou,  That  inasmuch  as  ye  did  so  to  one  of  tlicse 
my  little  brothers,  ye  did  so  to  me.     (41)  Then  will  41 
he  say  also  to  them  on  his  left  hand:   Go  from 
me,  ye  accursed,  into  everlasting'  lire,  which  was 
prepared   for   the   Calumniator''    and    his   angels. 

(42)  For  I  was  hungry,  and  ye  gave  me  no  food ;  42 
and    I  was   thirsty,   and  ye  gave  me   no  drink; 

(43)  and  I  was  a  stranger,  and  ye  took  me  not  43 
home ;  and  I  was  naked,  and  ye  clothed  me  not ; 
and  I  was  sick  and  in  prison,  and  ye  did  not  visit 
mc.     (44)  Then  will  they  also  answer  and  say:  44 
Our  Lord,  when  saw  we.  thee  hungry,  or  thirsty, 

or  a  stranger,  or  naked,  or  sick,  or  in  prison,  and 
did  not  minister  to  thee?  (45)  Then  will  he  an-  45 
swer,  and  say  to  them :  Verily  I  say  to  you,  That 
inasmuch  as  ye  did  not  so  to  one  of  these  little 
ones,  ye  did  not  so  to  me.  (40)  And  these  will  go  46 
into  everlasting  torment,'  and  the  righteous  into 
everlastinij;  life.'" 


And  it  came  to  pass,  when  Jesus  had  con-  XXVI 
eluded  all  these  discourses,  that  he  said  to  his  dis- 
ciples:  (2)  Ye   know  that  after  two  days  is  the 
passover;=i  and  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to  be 
crucified.      (3)   Then   assembled   the  chief  priests 
and  the  Scribes  and  the  PJlders  of  the  people,  at  the 
hall  of  the  high  priest,  who  was  called  Caiaphas.'' 
(4)  And  they  held  a  counsel  against  Jesus,  that  they 
might  take  him  by  guile,  and  kill  him.     (5)  But 
they  said :  Not  on  the  festival,  lest  there  be  a  com- 
motion among  the  people.     (6)  And  when  Jesus 
was  at  Bethany,  in  the  house  of  Simon  the  leper, 
(7)  there  came  to  him  a  woman  having  a  vase  of     7 
aromatic  ointment  very  precious,  and  she  poured  it 
on  the  head  of  Jesus  as  he  was  reclining.     (8)  And     8 
when  Ins  disciples  saw  [it]  they  were  displeased, 
and  said:  Why  is  this  waste?     (9)  For  this  [oint-     9 
ment]  might  have  been  sold  for  much,  and  have 
been  given  to  the  poor.     (10)  But  Jesus  knew  10 


2 


MATTHEW,    XXVI. 


53 


[their   dissatisfaction],    and   said   to   them:    Why 
ti-ouble   ye   the  woman?    She   hath    performed   a 

11  good  deed  towards  me.  (11)  For  the  poor  ye 
have  at  all  times  with  you;  but  I  am  not  witli  you 

12  always.  (12)  And  this  her  act,  pouring  the  oint- 
ment on  my  body,  she  hath  done  as  it  were  for  my 

13  burial.  (13)  Verily  I  say  to  you,  That  wherever 
this  my  gospel^  shall  be  proclaimed,  in  all  the 
world, '^  this  thing  that  she  hath  done  shall  be  told 
for  a  memorial  of  her. 

14  Then  one  of  the  twelve,  named  Judas  Iscariot, 

15  went  to  the  chief  priests,  (15)  and  said  to  them : 
What  will  ye  give  me,  if  I  will  deliver  him  to  you? 
And    they  promised   him  thirty  pieces  of  silver. 

16  (It))  And  from  that  time  he  sought  opportunity  to 

17  betray  him.  (17)  And  on  the  first  day  of  unleav- 
ened bread,  the  disciples  came  to  Jesus,  and  said 
to  him:  Where  wilt  thou  that  we  prepare  for  thee 

18  to  eat  the  passover?  (18)  And  he  said  to  them: 
Go  ye  into  the  city,  to  such^  a  man,  and  say  to 
him:  Our  Rabbi  saith.  My  time  approaches:  with 
thee  will  I  keep  the  passover  with  my  disciples. 

19  (19)  And  his  disciples  did  as  Jesus  directed  them, 

20  and  made  ready  the  passover.  (20)  And  when  it 
was  evening,  he  reclined  with  bis  twelve  disciples. 

21  (21)  And  as  they  were  eating,  he  said:  Verily  I 
say   to   vou.    That   one   of  you   will  betray    me. 

22  (22)  And  it  troubled  them  much.  And  they 
began  each  one  of  them  to  say  to  him;  My  Lord, 

23  is  "it  I  ?  (23)  And  he  answered  and  said :  One 
that  dippeth  his  hand  with  me  in  the  dish,  he  will 

24  betray  me.  (24)  And  the  Son  of  man  goeth,  as  it 
is  written  of  him :  but  woe  to  that  man,  by  whom 
the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed.  It  would  have  been 
better   for   that   man,    if  he   had  not  been  born. 

25  (25)  Judas  the  betrayer  answered  and  said:  Rabbi, 
is   it   I?      Jesus   said   to   him:    Thou   hast   said. 

26  (26)  And  as  they  were  eating,  Jesus  took  bread, 
and  blessed,  and  brake ;  and  gave  to  his  disciples, 

27  and  said:  Take,  eat;  this  is  my  body.f  (27)  And 
he  took  the  cup,  and  offered  thanks  ;  and  gave  [it] 
to  them,  saying :  Take,  drink  of  this  all  of  you. 

28  (28)  This  is  my 'blood  of  the  new  testament,?  which, 
in  behalf  of  many,  is  shed  for  the  remission  of  sins. 

29  (29)  But  I  say  to  you,  that  I  will  henceforth  not 
drink  of  this  product^  of  the  vine,  until  the  day  in 


Sy. 
Sy. 


Sy.^ 


Sy. 


Sy. 


Sy. 


54 


MATTHEW,    XXVI. 


or,  stumbled. 


^  Gr.  Peter. 


Sy.    VQca, 


^ 


Sy.  .j..ft.e^,a 


Sy.U. 


0> 


Sy.  spoke. 


80 
31 


32 


which  I  shall  drink  it  with  you  new  in  the  king- 
dom of  God. 

And  they  sang  praises,  and  went  forth  to  the 
moant  of  Olives.  (31)  Then  said  Jesus  to  them : 
Ye  will  all  be  offended'  in  me  this  night ;  for  it  is 
written,  I  will  smite  the  shepherd,  and  the  sheep 
of  his  flock  will  be  dispersed.  (32)  But  after  I  am 
arisen,  I  will  go  before  you  into  Galilee.  (33)  Ce-  33 
phas^^'  replied,  and  said  to  him:  Though  all  men 
should  be  offended  in  thee,  I  will  never  be  offended 
in  thee.  (34)  Jesus  said  to  him :  Verily  I  say  to  34 
thee,  That  this  night,  before  the  cock  crow,  thou 
wilt  thrice  deny  me.  (35)  Cephas  said  to  him :  If  35 
I  were  to  die  with  thee,  I  would  not  deny  thee: 
and  so  also  said  all  the  disciples. 

Then  came  Jesus  with  them  to  a  place  called  36 
Gethsemane:'  and  he  said  to  his  disciples,  Sit  yc 
here,  while  I  go  and  pra3^     (37)  And  he  took  Ce-  37 
phas  and  the  two  sons  of  Zebedee,  and  began  to  be 
dejected   and   sorrowful.      (38)   And   he   said    to  38 
them:  There  is  anguish  in  my  soul,""  even  unto 
death.      Wait  for  me  here;  and  watch  with  me. 
(39)  And  retiring  a  little,  he  fell  on  his  face,  and  39 
prayed,  and  said :  My  Father,  if  it  can  be  so,  let 
this  cup  pass  from  me.     Yet  not  as  I  choose,  but 
as  thou.      (40)    And  he  came  to  his  disciples,  and  40 
found  them  asleep:  and  he  said  to  Cephas:    So! 
could  ye  not  watch  with  me  one  hour?    (41)  Wake  41 
ye,  and  pray,  lest  ye  fall  into  temptation.     The 
mind"    is    prepared,    but     tlie     body    is    infirm. 

(42)  Again   he  went  away  the  second  time,  and  42 
prayed,  and  said :  j\[y  Father,  if  it  cannot  be  that 
this  cup  pass,  except  I  drink  it,  thy  will  be  done. 

(43)  And  he  came  again  and  found  them  sleeping,  43 
for  their  eyes  were  heavy.     (44)  And  he  left  them,  44 
and  went  again  and   prayed  the  third  time,  and 
used°  the  same  language.     (45)  Then  he  came  to  45 
his  disciples,  and  said  to  them :  Sleep  on  now,  and 
take  rest.     Behold,  the  hour  is  come :  and  the  Son 

of  man  is  betrayed  into  the  hands  of  sinners, 
(46)  Arise,  let  us  go.  Behold,  he  that  betray eth  46 
me  hath  come.  (47)  And  while  he  was  yet  speak-  47 
ing,  lo,  Judas  the  betrayer,  one  of  the  twelve, 
arrived;  and  a  great  multitude  with  liim,  with 
swords  and  clubs,  from  the  ])resence  of  the  chief 
priests  and  ciders  of  the  people.     (48)  And  Judas  48 


MATTHEW,    XXVI. 


65 


the  betrayer  had  given  them  a  sign,  saying :  He  it 

49  is,  Avhom  I  shall  kiss:  him  seize  ye.  (49)  And 
forthwith  he  approached  Jesns,  and  said:   IIail,P 

50  Kabbi ;  and  kissed  him.  (50)  And  Jesus  said  to 
him :  My  friend,  is  it  for  this  thou  hast  come  ? 
Then  they  came  up,  and  laid  their  hands  on  Jesus, 

51  and  took  him.  (51)  And  lo,  one  of  them  with 
Jesus  stretched  out  his  hand,  and  drew  a  sword, 
and  smote  a  servant  of  the  high  priest,  and  cut  off 

52  his  ear,  (52)  Then  Jesus  said  to  him :  Keturn  the 
sword  to  its  place ;  for  all  they  that  take  swords, 

53  shall  die  by  swords.  (53)  Supposest  thou  that  I 
cannot  ask  of  my  Father,  and  he  noAv  assign  me 

54  more  than  twelve  legions  of  angels?  (54)  But 
how  then  would  the  scriptures  be  fulfilled,  that 

55  thus  it  must  be  ?  (55)  At  that  time  Jesus  said  to 
the  multitude:  Have  ye  come  out,  as  against  a 
cut-throat,  with  swords  and  clubs,  to  take  me? 
I  daily  sat  with  you,  and  taught  in  the  temple,  and 

56  3'e  did  not  apprehend  me,  (56)  And  this  occurred, 
that  the  writings  of  the  prophets  might  be  fulfilled. 
Then  the  disciples  all  forsook  him  and  fled. 

57  And  they  who  apprehended  Jesus  carried  him 
to  Caiaphas  the  high  priest,  where  the  Scribes  and 

58  Elders  were  assembled.  (58)  And  Simon  Cephas'" 
followed  after  him  at  a  distance,  unto  the  high 
priest's  hall,  and  entered,  and  sat  with  the  servants 

59  within,  that  he  might  see  the  issue.  (59)  And  the 
chief  priests  and  the  Eklers  and  the  whole  assem- 
bly sought  for  witnesses  against  Jesus,  that  they 

60  might  put  him  to  death ;  (60)  and  found  them  not. 
And  many  flilse  witnesses  came ;  and  at  last,  two 

61  came  forward,  (61)  and  said:  This  man  said,  I  can 
destroy  the  temple  of  God,  and  in  three  days  re- 

62  build  it,  (62)  And  the  high  priest  rose  up  and 
said  to  him:  Hespondest  thou  nothing?     What  do 

63  these  testify  against  thee?  (63)  And  Jesus  was 
silent.  And  the  high  priest  answered,  and  said  to 
him:  I  adjure  thee  by  the  living  God,  that  thou 
tell  us  whether  thou  art  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of 

64  God.  (64)  Jesus  saith  to  him :  Thou  hast  said. 
And  I  say  to  you,  That  hereafter  ye  will  see  the 
Son  of  man  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  power, « 

Qo  and  coming  on  the  clouds  of  heaven.  (65)  Then 
the  high  priest  rent  his  clothes,  and  said :  Behold, 
he  hath  blasphemed!     Why  therefore  should  we 


p  Sy.  s^\  « 


o^J 


■•  Gr.  Peter. 


or,  might. 


56 


MATTHEW,    XXVII. 


seek  for  witnesses?     BeliolJ,  ye  have  now  heard 
his   blasphemy.      (QG)   What   is  your   pleasure?'  6Q 
They  answered  and  said:  He  is  liable^  to  death. 


'  or,  opijiion. 
^  or,  obnoxious. 


'^  Gr.  Peter. 


or,  immediate- 

ly. 


Sy. 

Gr.  »)y£ja6va. 


''  Sy.  place  of 
ojjferings. 


•=  Sy. 


{167)  Then  they  spit  in  his  face,  and  buffeted  him ;  67 
ana   others  smote   him,    (68)   and  said    to   him 


68 


Prophesy  to  us,   thou  Messiah,  who  is  it  smote 
thee? 

And  Cephas^  was  sitting  without  in  the  hall,  69 
and  a  certain  maid  approached  him,  and  said  to 
him:  Thou  also   wast  with  Jesus  the   Nazarean. 
(70)  But  he  denied  [it]  before  them  all,  and  said  :   70 
I  know  not  what  thou  sayest.     (71)  And  as  he  71 
went  out  into  the  porch,  another  maid  saw  him, 
and  said  to  them :  This  man  was  also  there  with 
Jesus  the  Nazarean.     (72)  And  again  he  denied,  72 
with  oaths :  I  know  not  that  man.     (73)  And  a  73 
little  after,  those  standing  [there]  came  up  and  said 
to  Cephas :  Certainly,  thou  too  art  one  of  them ; 
and  thy  speech  maketli  thee  manifest.     (74)  Then  74 
he  began  to  imprecate,  and  to  swear,  I  know  not 
that   man.     And  in   that   hour"^  the   cock   crew. 
(75)  And  Cephas  remembered  the  declaration  of  75 
jesus,  who  said  to  him:    Before  the  cock  croweth, 
thou  wilt  three  times  deny  me.     And  he  went  out, 
and  wept  bitterly. 

And  when  it  was  morning,  the  chief  priests  XXYII. 
and  the  ciders  of  the  people  held  a  council  against 
Jesus,  how  they  might  put  him  to  death.     (2)  And     2 
they  bound  him,   and  carried  him  and  delivered 
him  up  to  Pilate,  the  president.=^ 

Then  Judas  the  betrayer,  when  he  saw  that  Jesus     3 
was  condemned,  repented.      And  he  went  and  re- 
turned the  thirty  pieces  of  silver  to  the  chief  priests 
and   elders ;     (4)    and   said :    I   have   sinned,    by     4 
betraying  innocent  blood.     And  they  said :  What 
is  that  to  us  ?     See  to  it  thyself,     (5)  And  he  cast     5 
down  the  silver  in  the  temple,  and  retiring,  went 
and  strangled  himself      (6)  And  the  chief  priests     6 
took  up  the  silver,  and  said:    It  is  not  lawful  to 
put  it  into  the  treasury,  i^  because  it  is  the  price  of 
blood.      (7)    And  they  took  counsel,  and  bought     7 
with  it  the  potter's  field,  for  a  place  to  bury  stran- 
gers.    (8)  Wherefore  that  field  is  called  the  field     8 
of  blood, '^  unto  this  day.      (9)  Then  was  fallilled     9 
that  which  was  spoken  by  the  prophet,  saying :  I 


MATTHEW,    XXVII. 


57 


10 


11 


12 
18 


took  the  thirty  [shekels]  of  silver,  the  price  of  the 
precious  one,  which  they  of  tlie  children  of  Israel 
had  sti})ulated ;  (10)  and  I  gave  them  for  the  pot- 
ter's field,  as  the  Lord  directed  me. 

And  Jesus  stood  before  the  president.  And  the 
president  asked  him,  and  said  to  him:  Art  thou 
the  king  of  the  Jews?  And  Jesus  said  to  him: 
Thou  hast  said.  (12)  And  when  the  chief  priests 
and  elders  accused  him,  he  made  no  repl3\  (13) 
Then  Pihite  said  to  him :    Hearest  thou  not  how 

14  much  they  testify  against  thee  ?  (1-4)  But  he  gave 
him  no  answer,  not  even  one  word :  and  therefore 

15  Pilate  wondered  greatly.  (15)  And  at  each  festi- 
val, the  president  was  accustomed  to  release  to  the 

16  people  one  prisoner,  such  as  they  preferred.  (16) 
And  they  had  then  in  bonds  a  noted  prisoner, 
called  Bar  Abas.<i  (17)  And  when  they  were 
assembled,  Pihite  said  to  them:  Whom  will  ye,  that 
I  release  to  you.  Bar  Abas,  or  Jesus  who  is  called 
Messiah  ?     (18)  For  Pilate  knew  that  it  was  from 

19  enmity  they  had.  delivered  him  up.  (19)  And  as 
the  president  was  sitting  on  his  tribunal,^  his  wife 
sent  to  him,  and  said :  Have  thou  nothing  to  do 
with  that  just  man  ;  for  I  have  suffered  much  this 
day  in  a  dream  because  of  him,  (20)  But  the 
chief  priests  and  the  elders  persuaded  the  mul- 
titude, that  they  should  demand  Bar  Abas,   and 

21  destroy  Jesus.  (21)  And  the  president  answered, 
and  said  to  them  :  Which  of  the  two,  will  ye,  that 
I  release  to  you  ?  And  they  said :  Bar  Abas.  (22) 
Pilate  said  to  them :  And  what  shall  I  do  to  Jesus 
Avho  is  called  Messiah  ?  They  all  replied :  Let 
him  be  crucified.  (23)  The  president^ said  to  them : 
But  what  hath  he  done,  that  is  evil?  And  they 
cried  out  the  more,  and  said  :  Let  him  be  crucified. 
(2-1)  And  Pilate,  when  he  saw  that  it  availed 
nothing,  but  rather  that  tumult  was  produced,  took 
water,  and  washed  his  hands  before  the  eyes  of  the 
multitude,  and  said:  I  am  pure  from  the  blood  of 
this  just  man  :  see  ye  to  it.  (25)  And  all  the 
people  answered,  and  said:  His  blood  be  on  us, 
and  on  our  children  !  (26)  Then  released  he  to 
them  Bar  Abas  ;  and  scourged  Jesus  with  whips,? 

27  and  delivered  him  to  be  crucified.  (27)  Then  the 
soldiers  of  the  president  took  Jesus  into  the  Pra3- 
torium,h  and  assembled  the  whole  regiment'  against 


17 


18 


20 


22 


23 


24 


2o 


26 


J  Gr. 

Bapa/3/3aj. 


Sy.  :>Qj^, 
Gr.  (3r,ij,a. 


i.  e.  Pilate. 


?  Sy.  ]3^g£lID, 
from  Greek. 

t>  Sv. 

.  Sy.  ',.^j2i£dI 
Gr.  (fifsTpa. 


68 


MATTHEW,    XXVII. 


^  Sy.  V^\« 


Sy. 


^^ 


■Sy.U4^a:^, 

Gr.  X^ifT&ci. 


"  or,  saved. 
°  or,  save. 


him.     (28)   And  they  stripped  him,  and  put  on  28 
hinj  a  scarlet  mihtary  cloak.    (29)  And  they  wove  29 
a  crown  of  thorns,  and  set  it  on  his  head,   and 
Q^ut]  a  reed  in  his  hand,  and  they  bowed  their 
knees   before   him,   and  mocked  him,   and  said : 
Ilail,"^  thou  king  of  the  Jews.     (30)  And  they  spit  30 
in  his  face,  and  took  the  reed,  and  smote  him  on 
his  head,      (31)    And    when    they   had    mocked  31 
him,  they  divested  him  of  the  cloak,  and  clothed 
him  in  his  own  garments,  and  led  him  out  to  be 
crucified. 

And  as  they  went  out,  they  found  a  man  of  82 
Cyreue  whose  name  was  Simon ;   him  they  com- 
pelled to  bear  his  cross,      (33)  And  they  came  to  33 
a  place  which  is  called  Golgotha, ^  which  is  inter- 
preted a  skull.     (34)  And  they  gave  him  to  drink  3J: 
vinegar  mixed  with  gall.     And  he  tasted  [it],  and 
would  not  drink.     (35)  And  when  they  had  cruci-  35 
fied  him,  they   distributed  his  garments  by  lot,* 

(36)  And  they  sat  down,  and  watched  him  there.  36 

(37)  And  they  placed  over  his  head  the  cause  of  37 
his  death,  in   the   writing :   This  is  Jesus,  the 
KING  OF  THE  Jews.     (38)  And  there  were  cruci-  38 
fied  with  him  two  robbers, ^  the  one  on  his  right 
hand,  and  the  other  on  liis  left. — (39)  And  they  39 
that  passed  by  reviled  him,  and  shook  their  heads, 
(4:0)    and     said:    Destroyer   of  the    temple,    and  40 
builder  of  it  in  three  days,  deliver  thyself,  if  thou 
art   the   Son   of  God,  and  come  down  from  the 
cross.     (41)  So  also  the  chief  priests  mocked,  with  41 
the  Scribes  and  Elders  and   Pharisees,    (42)   and  42 
said :  He  gave  life"  to  others,  his  own  life  he  can- 
not preserve.^     If  he  is  the  king  of  Israel,  let  him 
now  descend  from  the  cross,  and  we  will  believe 

in  him.f     (43)  He  trusted  in  God ;  let  him  rescue  43 
him  now,  if  he  hath  pleasure  in  him :  for  he  said, 


*  In  the  editions  of  1815  and  1826  is  the  following  note:— 

"  According  to  some  of  the  Greek  copies,  there  is  added,  thus:  that  so  mighl 
he  fulfilled  that,  which  was  spoken  Inj  (he  prophet  David:  They  distributed  mij  gar- 
ments among  them,  and  upon  my  vesture  tliey  cast  the  lot.'' 

This  addition  is  not  found  in  four  of  the  most  ancient  editions  of  the  Syriac 
New  Testament,  and  it  is  put  in  the  murgin  of  the  more  modern  editions.  It  was 
doubtless  a  modern  addiiioii  to  tlie  Syriac  New  Testament,  borrowed  from  the 
Greek. — Translator. 

t  In  some  editions:  that  we  may  see,  and  believe  in  him. 


:\;atthew,  XXVII. 


59 


44  I  am  the  Son  of  God.  (44)  In  like  manner  the 
maraiidersP  also,  that   were   crucified   with   him, 

45  reproached  him, — (45)  And  from  the  sixth  hour 
there  was  darkness  over  all  the  land,""  until  the 

46  ninth  hour.  (46)  And  abont  the  ninth  hour,  Jesus 
cried  with  a  loud  voice  and  said  :  O  God,  0  God ; 

47  Avhj  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?*  (47)  And  some  of 
them  that  stood  there,  when  they  heard  [it],  said: 

48  lie  calleth  for  Elijah.^  (48)  And  immediately  one 
of  them  ran,  and  took  a  sponge,  and  filled  it  with 
vinegar,  and  put  it  on  a  reed,  and  gave  him  to 

49  drink.     (49)   But  the  rest  said:    Desist;    we  will 

50  see  if  Elijah  will  come  to  rescue  him.  (50)  Then 
Jesus  cried  again  with  a  loud  voice,  and  yielded  up 

51  his  spirit. t — (51)  And  instantly,  the  curtain^  of  the 
door  of  the  temple  was  torn  asunder,  from  the 
top  to  the  bottom  ;  and  the  earth  shook ;  and  the 

52  rocks  rived  ;    (52)  and  graves  were  opened ;   and 

53  many  bodies  of  saints  who  slept,  arose,  (58)  and 
came  forth  ;  and,  after  his  resurrection,  entered  into 

54  the  holy  city,  and  appeared  to  many.  (54)  And 
the  centurion,  and  they  that  were  with  him 
guarding  Jesus,  Avhen  they  saw  the  earthquake 
and  the  things  that  occurred,  feared  greatly,  and 

55  said :  Verily,  this  was  the  Son  of  God.  (55)  And 
many  women  were  there,  looking  on  from  a 
distance ;  the  same  who  had  followed  Jesus  from 

56  Galilee,  and  had  ministered  to  him.  (56)  One  of 
them  was  Mary  of  JMagdala,  also  Mary  the  mother 
of  James  and  Joses,  and  the  mother  of  Zebedee's 

57  children.  (57)  And  when  it  was  evening,  there 
came  a  rich  man  of  Ilamath,^  whose  name  was 

58  Joseph,  who  was  also  a  disciple  of  Jesus.  (58) 
This  man  went  to  Pilate,  and  begged  the  body 
of  Jesus.      And   Pihite  directed  the  body  to  be 

59  given  him.  (59)  And  Joseph  took  the  body,  and 
wrapped   it   in   a  winding-sheet   of  clean   linen; 

60  (60)  and  laid  it  in  his  new  sepulchre,''  that  was 
excavated  in  a  rock.  And  he  rolled  a  great  stone 
against  the  door  of  the  sepulchre,  and  departed: 

61  (61)  And  there  Avere  present  Mary  of  I\Iagdala, 
and    the    other  Mary,  Avho   sat   over   against  the 

62  grave. — (62)  And  on  the  day  that  Avas  next  after 


or,  earlli. 


Ilio. 


'  Sy.  CiT-K»05 

"  ^y.face. 


Sy.  1ASd5 


>=  Sy. 


*  Sy.  *j_3An.O J   |l.kl^  ^"1    ^1 ;     11,  II,  lembno  shehdkihone  1 


60 


MATTHEW,    XXVi;i. 


Sy. 


^  Sy.  said. 


Sy.  :>qX. 


the   pre[)arat.ion,   the  chief  priests   and  Pharisees 
assembled   before    Pihite,    (68)  and   said  to  him:  63 
Oar  Lord,  we  remember  that  this  deceiver  said, 
while  he  wius  alive,  After  three  days,  I  shall  arise. 
(64)  Command,  therefore,  to  guard  the  sepulchre,  64 
uniil  the  third  day ;   lest  his  disciples  come  and 
steal  him  away  by  night,  and  say  to  the  people, 
that  he  hath  risen  from  the  dead;    and   the  last 
delusion  be  worse  than  the  first.     {65)  Pilate  said  (jo 
to  them:    Ye  have  soldiers:  go  and  guard  it,  as 
ye  know  how.      (66)    And   they  went  and  set  a  66 
guard  to  the  sepulchre,  and  sealed  the  stone. 

And  in  the  close^  of  the  sabbath,  as  the  XXVIII. 
first    [ila}-]    of  the   week   began   to   dawn,    came 
Mary  of  Magdala  and  the  other  Mary,  to  view 
the   sepulchre. — (2)    And   lo,    there   was  a  great     2 
earthquake:  for  an  angel  of  the  Lord  descended 
from  heaven,  and  came  and  rolled  away  the  stone 
from    the   door,  and   sat   upon  it.      (8)    And  his     3 
aspect    was    like  the  lightning;    and  his  raiment 
white    like    snow:     (4)    and   from    fear    of   him     4 
the  keepers  were  astounded,  and  became  as  dead 
men. — (5)   And  the   angel  answered,  and  said  to     5 
the  women :    Be  not   ye  afraid,  for  I  know    that 
ye  seek  Jesus  who  was  crucified.     (6)  He  is  not     6 
here ;    for   he  is    risen,  as   he    predicted. '^     Come 
ye,  see  the  place  where  our  Lord  was  laid.     (7)     7 
And  [then]  go  quickly,  tell  his  disciples,  that  he 
is  risen  from  the  dead ;  and  lo,  he  precedeth  you 
to  Galilee;  there  will  3^e  see  him.     Behold,  I  have 
told  you. — (S)   And  they  went  quickly  from  the     8 
sepulchre,  with  fear  and  great  joj^,  and  ran  to  tell 
his  disciples.     (9)    And  lo,  Jesus  met  them,  and     9 
said    to  them:    Hail,<^  ye.     And   they  came    and 
clasped  his  feet,  and  worshipped  him.     (10)  Then  10 
Jesus  said  to  them :    Be  not  afraid  ;    but  go,  tell 
my  brethren,  that  they  go  into  Galilee,  and  there 
they  will  see  nic. 

And  while  they  were  going,  some  of  the  guards  11 
came  into  the  city,  and  told  the  chief  priests  all 
that  had  occurred.    (12)  And  they  a.s.sembled  with  12 
the    Elders,  and  held   a  council ;    and    they  gave 
no  little  money  to  the   guards,    (13)  and  said  to  13 
them:    Say  ye,   that  his  disciples  came  and  stole 
him  away  by  night,  while  we  were  asleep.     (14)  14 


MARK,    I. 


61 


And  if  this  should  be  reported  before  the  Presi- 
dent, we  will   pacify  him,  and  cause  you  not  to 

15  be  troubled.  (15)  And  they,  having  received  the 
money,  did  as  they  were  instructed.  And  this 
storyf^  is  current  among  the  Jews  to  this  da3\ 

16  And  the  eleven  disciples  went  into  Galilee,  to 
the  mountain  which  Jesus  had  appointed  for  them. 

17  (17)  And  when  they  beheld  him,  they  worshipped 

18  him :  but  some  doubted.  (18)  And  Jesus  came 
near,  and  discoursed  with  them,  and  said  to  them : 
All  authority  is  given  to  me,  in  heaven  and  on 
earth.     And  as  my  Father  sent  me,  so  also  I  send 

19  you.  (19)  Go  ye,  therefore,  and  instructe  all  na- 
tions; and  baptize  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father, 

20  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  (20)  And 
teachf  them  to  observe  all  that  I  have  commanded 
you.  And,  behold,  1  am  with  you  always, o  unto 
the  consummation  of  the  world.'^     Amen. 


ComfAetion  of  the  Holy  Gospel'^  as  published  by  Matthew ; 
and  which  he  published  in  Hebrew,^  in  the  land  of  the  Pales- 
tincans. 


Sy.lAlLD= 


saying. 


e  Sy.  OjIqXZ 

f  Sy.  0  ^  V\ 
s  Sy.  all  days. 

"Sy.jvnNs 

Sy. 

"  Sy.  ZuljjiiL 


vQ^^-V^-Jol 


Tlie  Holy  Gospel,  the  Anmmciatioii  of  Mark  the  Evangelist. 


I.       The    beginning    of  the    gospel=i  of  Jesus  the 

2  Messiah,  the  Son  of  God. — (2)  As  it  is  written  in 
Isaiah  the  prophet :    Behold,  I  send  my  messenger 

3  before  thy  face,  who  shall  prepare  thy  way.  (8) 
The  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness: 
Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord ;  make  smooth 

4  his  paths.  (4)  John  baptized  in  the  wilderness, 
and  proclaimed  the  baptism^  of  repentance  for  the 

5  remission  of  sins.  (5)  And  there  went  out  to  him 
all  the  region^  of  Judtea,  and  all  the  people^  of 
Jerusalem ;    and   he  baptized   them  in  the  river 

6  Jordan,  while  they  confessed  their  sins.     (6)  And 


Sy. 


i-Sy. 

<=  Sy.  hOD, 
Gr.  x^p«- 

^  Sy.  children. 


62 


"Sy.  li^^ 
'  Sy.  lZ-2^ 


e  Sy.  ^,£:,] 


•>  Sy. 


or,  teaching. 


MARK,    I. 

this  John  was  clad  in  raiment  of  camels'  hair; 
and  was  girded  with  a  cincture  of  skin  about  his 
loins;  and  his  food  was  locusts  and  wild  honey. 
(7)  And  he  proclaimed,  and  said:  Behold,  after  7 
me  cometh  one  more  powerful  than  I,  of  whom  I 
am  not  worthy  to  stoop  and  untie  the  fastenings  of 
his  shoes.  (8)  I  have  baptized  3''ou  with  water ;  8 
but  he  will  baptize  you  with  the  Iloly  Spirit. 

And  it  occurred,  in  those  days,  that  Jesus  came     9 
from  Nazareth  in  Galilee,  and   was  baptized  in 
Jordan  by  John.     (10)  And  immediately  on  his  10 
coming  from  the  water,  he  saw  the  heavens  cleft, 
and  the  Spirit  descending  like  a  dove  upon  him. 

(11)  And  there  was  a  voice  from  the  heavens:  11 
Thou  art  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  delight. — 

(12)  And  directly  the  Spirit  carried  him  into  the  12 
wilderness:  (13)  and  he  was  there  in  the  wilder-  13 
ness  forty  days,  being  tempted  by  Satan. ^     And 

he  was  with  the  wild  beasts ;    and  angels  minis- 
tered to  him. 

After  John  was  delivered  up,  Jesus  came  into  1-1 
Galilee,  and  proclaimed  the  tidings^  of  the  king- 
dom of  God,    (15)   and  said:  The  time  is  com-  15 
pleted,  and  the  kingdom  of  God  is  near.     Eepent 
ye,    and  believe  the   tidings. — (16)    And   as    he  16 
walked  near  the  sea  of  Galilee,  he  saw  Simon  and 
Andrew  his  brother  casting  a  net  into  the  sea, 
for  the}''  were  fishermen.     (17)   And  Jesus  said  to  17 
them :  Come  after  me,  and  I  will  make  you  fishers 
of  men.     (18)  And  immediately   they   left  their  18 
nets,  and  went  after  him.      (19)  And  as  he  passed  19 
on  a  little,  he  saw  James  the  son  of  Zebedce,g  and 
John  his  brother,  who  also  were  in  a  ship,  and 
mending  their  nets.     (20)   And  he  called  them :  20 
and  immediately  they  left  Zebedee  their  father  in 
the  ship,  with  the  hired  servants,  and  Avent  after 
him. 

And  when  they  entered  Capernaum,''  he  im-  21 
mediately  taught   on  the  sabbath  in  their  syna,- 
gogues.      (22)    And  they  were  astonished  at  his  22 
doctrine  ;'  for  he  taught  them,  as  having  authority, 
and    not   as    their  Scribes. — (23)    And   in  their  23 
synagogue  was  a  man,  in  whom  was  an  unclean 
spirit;    and  he  cried  out,    (24)   and  said:    What  24 
have  we  to  do  with  thee?  Jesus  thou  Nazarean. 
Hast  thou  come  to  destroy  us  ?    I  know  thee,  who 


MARK,    I. 


63 


25  thou  art,  tlie  Holy  One  of  God.  (25)  And  Jesus 
rebuked   him,   and   said :    Shut    thy   mouth,   and 

26  come  out  of  him.  (26)  And  the  unclean  spirit 
threw  him  down,  and  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and 

27  came  out  of  him.  (27)  And  they  were  all  amazed, 
and  inquired  one  of  another,  and  said:  What  is 
this?  What  new  doctrine  is  this?  For  with 
authority  he  commandeth  the  unclean  spirits,  and 

28  they  obey  him.     (28)  And  immediately  his  fame 

29  spread^  into  all  the  land  of  Galilee. — (29)  And  he 
retired  from  the  synagogue,  and  entered  into  the 
house  of  Simon  and  Andrew,  with  James  and 
John.  (30)  And  Simon's  mother-in-law  was  lying 
sick  with  a  fever:  and  they  told  him  about  her. 
(31)  And  he  came,  and  took  her  hand,  and 
raised  her  up ;  and  immediately  the  fever  left  her, 
and  she  ministered  to  them. — (32)  And  in  the 
evening,  at  the  setting  of  the  sun,  they  brought  to 
him  all  them  that  were  diseased,  and  demoniacs. 

(33)  And  all  the  city  was  collected-  at  the  door. 

(34)  And  he  healed  many  who  labored  under 
divers  diseases,  and  cast  out  many  demons  ;i  and 
he  suffered  not  the  demons  to  speak,  because  they 
knew  him. 

And  in  the  morning,  he  rose  much  before  others, 
and  retired  to  a  solitary  place,  and  there  prayed. 
(36)  And  Simon  and  his  associates'"  sought  for 
him.  (37)  And  when  they  found  him,  they  said 
to  him :  Every  body"  is  seeking  for  thee.  (38) 
And  he  said  to  them :  Go  into  the  adjacent 
vill%es  and  towns;  for  there  also  I  will  preach, 
because  therefore  have  I  come.  (39)  And  he 
preached  in  all  their  synagogues,  in  all  Galilee, 
and  cast  out  demons. 

And  a  leper  came  to  him,  and  fell  at  his  feet, 
and  entreated  him,  and  said  to  him :  If  thou  wilt, 
thou  canst  make  me  clean.  (41)  And  Jesus  had 
compassion  on  him,  and  stretched  out  his  hand, 
and  touched  him,  and  said :  I  will ;  be  thou  clean. 
(42)  And  in  that  hour,  his  leprosy  departed  from 
him,  and  he  became  clean.     (43)  And  he  charged 

44  him,  and  sent  him  away,  (44)  and  he  said  to  him: 
See  that  thou  tell  no  person;  but  go,  show  thyself 
to  the  priests,  and  offer  an  oblation  on  account  of 
thy  purification,  as  Moses  commanded,  for  a  testi- 

45  mony  to  them.     (45)  And  he,  as  he  went   out, 


30 
31 


.q9. 


S3 
34 


35 

36 
37 

38 


39 


40 
41 


42 
43 


^  Sy.  went. 


Sy.  "jol'j 


■"  or,  those  with 

Mm. 
"  or,  every  one. 


64 


MARK,    II. 


Sy-^AlLD 


Sy.  spake. 


Sy.  aT-Kj0}.O 

Sy.  these 
ihinss. 


Sy.  the  eyes. 


Sy.  -^  adll 


began  to  proclaim   [it]   much,  and  to  divulge  the 
matter;'^  so  that  Jesus  could  not  openly  go  into 
the  city,  but  was  without,  in  desert  places;   and 
they  came  to  him  from  every  quarter. 
• 

And  Jesus  again  entered  into  Capernaum,  after  II. 
some  days.     And  when  they  heard  that  he  was  in 
the  house,  (2)  many  were  assembled,  so  that  [the     2 
house]  could  not  contain  them,   not  even  before 
the    door.     And   he   he]d=^    discourse   with   them. 
(3)  And  they  came  to  him,  and  brought  to  him  a     3 
paralytic,  borne  between  four  persons.     (4)  And     4 
as  they  could  not  come  near  him  on  account  of  the 
crowd,  they  ascended  to  the  roof,  and  removed  the 
covering  of  the  place  where  Jesus  was,  and   let 
down  the  bed  on  which  the  paralytic  lay,    (5)  And     5 
when  Jesus  saw  their  faith,  he  said  to  the  paralytic: 
My  son,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee.     (6)  And  there     6 
were  some  Scribes  and  Pharisees -there,  who  sat  and 
reasoned  in  their  hearts :  (7)  Who  is  this  speaking     7 
blasphemy?     Who  can  forgive  sins,  except  God 
only  ?    (8)  And  Jesus  knew,  in  his  spirit,*'  that  they     8 
thus  reasoned  in  themselves  ;  and  he  said  to  them: 
Why  reason  ye  thus'=  in  your  heart?     (9)  Which     9 
is  the  easier,  to  say  to  a  paralytic.  Thy  sins  are  for- 
given thee  ?  or  to  say.  Arise,  take  up  thy  bed,  and 
walk?     (10)  But  that  ye  may  know  that  the  Son  10 
of  man  hath  power  on  earth  to  forgive  sins, — he 
said  to  the  paralytic,  (11)  I  say  to  thee,  Arise,  take  11 
thy  bed,  and  go  to  thy  house.     (12)  And  he  arose  12 
in  that  hour,   took  up  his  bed,  and  deparWd  in 
presence^  of  tliem  all :  so  that  they  were  all  amazed, 
and  praised  God,  saying :  AVe  never  saw  the  like. 

And  he  went  again  to  the  sea;  and  all  the  multi-  13 
tude  came  to  him,  and  he  taught  them.     (14)  And  14 
as  he  passed  along  he  saw  Levi  the  son  of  Alphe- 
us^  sitting  among  the  publicans.     And  he  said  to 
him:    Come  after  me.     And  he  arose  and  went 
after  him. — (15)  And  it  was  so,  that  as  he  reclined  15 
in  his  [Levi's]  house,  many  publicans  and  sinners 
reclined  with  Jesus  and  with  his  discij^les:  for  they 
were  many,   and  they  followed    him.     (16)  And  16 
when  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  saw  that  he  ate 
with  publicans  and  with  sinners,  they  said  to  his 
disciples:  Why  doth  he  cat  and  drink  with  pub- 
licans and  sinners?     (17)  When  Jesus  heard  [it],  17 


MARK,    III. 


65 


he  said  to  them :  The  healthy  need  not  a  physician, 
but  those  laboring  under  disease:  I  came,  not  to 

18  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners. — (18)  And  the  dis- 
ciples of  John  and  of  the  Pharisees  were  fiisters ; 
and  they  came  and  said  to  him :  AVhy  are  the  dis- 
ciples of  John  and  of  the  Pharisees  fasters,  and  thy 

19  disciples  fast  not?  (19)  Jesus  said  to  them:  Can  the 
guests^'  of  the  nuptial  chamber  fast  so  long  as  the 

20  bridegroom  is  with  them  ?  No.  (20)  But  the  days 
will  come,  when  the  bridegroom  will  be  taken  from 

21  them,  and  then  they  will  fast,  in  that  day.  (21)  No 
one  taketli  a  patch  of  new  cloth  and  seweth  it  upon 
an  old  garment,  lest  the  supplemental  new  should 
take  from  the  old,  and  the  rent  become  the  greater. 

22  (22)  And  no  one  putteth  new  wine  into  old  sacks, 
lest  the  wine  burst  the  sacks,  and  the  sacks  be 
spoiled,  and  the  wine  spilled;  but  they  put  new 

23  wine  into  new  sacks. — (23)  And  it  was  so,  that  as 
Jesus  on  a  sabbath  walked  in  the  tillage  grounds, 

21  his  disciples  walked  and  plucked  the  ears.  (24)  And 
the  Pharisees  said  to  him:  See,  how  on  the  sabbath, 

25  they  do  that  which  is  not  lawful  ?  (25)  Jesus  said 
to  them :  Have  ye  never  read  what  David  did, 
when  he  had  need  and  was  hungry,  he  and  his  at- 

26  tendants?&  (26)  How  he  entered  the  house  of  God, 
wlien  Abiathar  was  high  priest,  and  ate  the  bread 
of  the  Lord's  table,  which  it  was  not  lawful  for  any 
but  priests  to  eat,  and  gave  [it]  also  to  those  with 

27  him?  (27)  And  he  said  to  them:  The  sabbath 
was  made  on  man's  account,  and  not  man  for  the 

28  sake  of  the  sabbath.  (28)  Therefore  also  the  Son 
of  man  is  lord  of  the  sabbath. 

III.  And  again  Jesus  entered  into  a  synagogue.  And 
there  was  a  man  there,  whose  hand  was  withered. 

2  (2)  And  they  watched  him,  that  if  he  should  heal 

3  on  the  sabbath,  they  might  accuse  him.  (5)  And 
he  said  to  the  man  of  the  withered  hand :  Stand  up 

4  in  the  midst.  (-1)  And  he  said  also  to  them :  Is  it 
lawful  to  do  good  on  the  sabbath,  or  to  do  evil? 
to  give  life  to  a  person,^  or  to  destroy?     But  they 

5  were  silent.  (5)  And  he  looked  on  them  with  in- 
dignation, being  grieved  with  the  hardness  of  their 
heart.  And  he  said  to  the  man :  Stretch  forth  thy 
hand.     And  he  stretched  forth,  and  his  hand  was 

6  restored.     (6)  And  the  Pharisees  went  out,  that 


Sy.  children. 


Sy.  those  with 
him. 


Sy.]. 


.2U 


66 


•"  Sy.  rebuked. 


E  Sy.  jjZ 
i-  Sy. 

'  Sy. 

OUOOI    ,_lD 
■^  or,  parabhs. 


MARK,    III. 

very  hour,  witli  the  domestics  of  Herod,  and  held 
a  consultation  against  him,  how  they  might  destroy 
hira. 

And  Jesus  retired  Avitli  his  disciples  to  the  sea.     7 
And  many  people  joined  him  from  Galilee,  and 
from  Jud»a,   (8)  and  from  Jerusalem,   and  from     8 
Idumaea,  and  from  beyond  Jordan,  and  from  Tyre, 
and   from    Sidon: — great   multitudes,   when   they 
heard  all  that  he  did,  came  to  him.    (9)  And  he     9 
told  his  disciples  to  bring  him  a  ship,  on  account 
of  the  multitude,  lest  they  should  crowd  upon  him. 
(10)  For  he  had  healed  many,  so  that  they  rushed  10 
upon  him,  in  order  to  touch  him.     (11)  And  they  11 
who  were  afflicted  with  unclean  spirits,  when  they 
saw  him,  fell  down  and  cried  out,  and  said :  Tliou 
art  the  Son  of  God.     (12)  And  he  charged'*  them  12 
much,  not  to  make  him  known. 

And  he  ascended  a  mountain,  and  called  whom  13 
he  pleased ;  and  they  came  to  him.     (14)  And  he  11 
chose  twelve  to  be  with  him,  whom  he  would  send 
out  to  preach,  (15)  and  who  would  have  power  to  15 
heal  the  sick,  and  to  cast  out  demons.     (16)  And  to  16 
Simon  he  gave  the  name  of  Cephas.*^     (17)  And  to  17 
James  the  son  of  Zebedee  and  to  John  the  brother 
of  James,  he  gave  the  name  of  Boanerges,''  that  is. 
Sons  of  thunder.     (18)  And  [he  chose  also]  An-  18 
drew,  and  Philip,  and  Bartholomew,*'  and  Matthew, 
and  Thomas,  and  James  the  son  of  Alpheus,^  and 
Thaddeus,g  and  Simon  the  Canaanite,  (19)  And  19 
Judas  Iscariot,  who  betrayed  him. 

And  they  came  to  the  house :  (20)  and  the  mul-  20 
litude  assembled  again,  so  that  they  could  not  eat 
bread.     (21)  And  his  kinsmen^i  heard,  and  went  21 
out  to  take  him ;  for  they  said :  He  is  out  of  his 
reason.'     (22)  And  those  Scribes  that  had  come  22 
down  from  Jerusalem,  said :  Beelzebub  is  in  him ; 
and  by  the  prince  of  demons  he  cxpelleth  demons. 
(23)  And  Jesus  called  them,  and  said  to  them,  by  23 
similitudes  -.^     How   can    Satan    cast   out   Satan  ? 
(2-4)  For  if  a  kingdom  be  divided   against  itself,  21 
that  kingdom  cannot  stand.     (25)  And  if  a  house  25 
be  divided  against  itself,  tliat  house  cannot  stand. 
(26)  And  if  Satan  rise  up  against  himself  and  be  26 
divided,  he  cannot  stand,  but  is  at  an  end.    (27)  No  27 
one  can  enter  the  house  of  a  strong  man,  and  plun- 
der his  ;:(oods,  unless  he  first  bind  the  strong  man ; 


MARK,    IV. 


67 


28  and  then  he  may  rob  his  house.  (28)  Verily  I  say 
to  you :  All  sins,  and  the  blasphemies  that  men 

29  may  utter,'  may  be  forgiven  them:  (29)  but  who- 
ever shall  blaspheme  against  the  Holy  Spirit,  to 
him  for  ever™  there  is  no  forgiveness ;  but  he  is  ob- 

80  noxious"  to  eternal^  judgment.     (30)  Because  they 

31  had  said:  An  unclean  spirit  is  in  him. — (31)  And 
his  mother  and  his  brothers?  came,  and,  standing 

32  without,  sent  to  call  him  to  them.  (32)  And  the 
multitude  were  sitting  around  him,  and  they  said 
to  him :  Lo,  thy  mother  and  thy  brothers,  without, 

33  call  for  thee.  (33)  He  replied,  and  said  to  them : 
Who  is  my  mother  ?  and  who  are  my  brothers  ? 

34  (34)  And  he  looked  upon  those  who  sat  by  him, 
and  said :    Behold  my  mother !   and,   behold  my 

35  brothers !  (35)  For  whoever  shall  do  the  pleasure 
of  God,  he  is  my  brother,  and  my  sister,  and  my 
mother. 

IV.  And  again  he  began  to  teach  by  the  side  of  the 
sea.     And  great  multitudes  were  assembled  about 

•  him  ;  so  that  he  embarked  and  sat  in  a  ship  on  the 
sea,  and  all  the  multitude  stood  on  the  land  by  the 

2  side  of  the  sea.  (2)  And  he  taught  them  much 
by  similitudes.^      And  in  his  teaching,  he  said: 

3  (3)  Hear  ye :  Behold  a  sower  went  forth  to  sow. 

4  (4)  And  as  he  sowed,  some  [seed]  fell  on  the  side 
of  the  path ;    and  a  bird  came,  and  devoured  it. 

5  (5)  And  other  [seed]  fell  on  a  rock,  so  that  it  had  not 
much  earth ;  and  it  soon  shot  up,  because  it  had 

6  no  depth  of  earth.  (6)  But  when  the  sun  was  up, 
it  wilted ;  and  because  it  had  no  root,  it  dried  up. 

7  (7)  An4  other  [seed]  fell  among  thorns.  And  the 
thorns  grew  up,  and  choked  it,  and  it  yielded  no 

8  fruits.  (8)  And  other  [seed]  fell  on  good  ground, 
and  came  up,  and  grew,  and  yielded  fruits ;  some 

9  thirty,  some  sixty,  and  some  a  hundred.  (9)  And 
he  said :  Whoever  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear. 

10  — (10)  And  when  they  were  by  themselves,  those 
with  him,  together  with  the  twelve,   asked  him 

11  [concerning]  this  similitude.i^  (11)  And  Jesus 
said  to  them:  To  you  it  is  given  to  know  the 
mystery  of  the  kingdom  of  God;    but  to  them 

12  without,  all  is  in  similitudes:  (12)  that  when  they 
see,  they  may  see  and  not  see,  and  when  they  hear, 
they   may   near   and  not  understand;    lest  they 


'  Sy.  blaspheme. 

"  Sy.  debtor. 
°Sy.  V^\v\ 

P  Sy.  uaiQ_K»"| 


or,  paraJjlea. 


^  or,  parable. 


68 


MARK,    IV. 


Sy.  doth  come. 


Sy.fat. 


0  or,  parable. 


13 

14 
15 


16 


should  be  converted,  and  their  sins  be  forgiven 
them.      (13)    And  he  said  to  them:    Do  ye  not 
understand  this  similitude  ?     And  how  will   ye 
understand  all  similitudes?     (14)  The  sower  that 
sowed,  sowed  the  word.     (15)  And  those  by  the 
side  of  the  path,  are  they  in  whom  the  word  is 
sown ;  and  as  soon  as  they  have  heard  [it],  Satan 
Cometh,  and  taketh  away  the  word  that  was  sown 
in  their  hearts.     (16)  And  those  sown  on  the  rock, 
are  they  who,  when  they  hear  the  word,  immedi- 
ately with  joy  receive  it.     (17)  And  they  have  no  17 
root  in  them,  but  are  temporary  ;  and  when  there 
is  affliction  or  persecution  on  account  of  the  word, 
they  are  quickly  stumbled.     (18)  And  those  sown  18 
among  thorns,  are  they  that  hear  the  word,  (19)  19 
and  the  cares  of  this  world,  and  the  deceitfulness 
of  riches,  and  the  residue  of  other  lusts  enter  in, 
and  choke  the  word,  and  it  is  without  fruits.     (20)  20 
And  those  sown  on  good  ground  are  they  that 
hear  the  word,  and  receive  it,  and  bear  fruits,  by 
thirties,  and   by  sixties,   and   by  hundreds. — (21)  21 
And  he  said  to  them :  Is  a  lamp  broughf^  to  be 
placed  under  a  bushel,  or  under  a  bed  ?     Is  it  not 
to  be  placed  on  a  light-stand?     (22)  For  there  is  22 
nothing  hid,   which   will   not  be   exposed ;    and 
nothing  concealed,  which  will  not  be  made  mani- 
fest.    (23)  If  any  one  have  ears  to  hear,  let  him 
hear. — (24)  And  he  said  to  them :  Take  heed  Avhat 
ye  hear:  with  what  measure  ye  measure,  it  shall 
be  measured  to  you :  and  there  shall  more  be  given 
to  you  who  hear.     (25)  For  to  him  that  hath,  will  25 
more  be  given  ;  and  from  him  that  hath  not,  even 
what  he  hath,  will  be  taken  from  him. — (26)  And  26 
he  said:   So  is  the  kingdom  of  God,  as  if  a  man 
should  cast  seed  into  the  ground,  (27)  and  should  27 
sleep  and  rise,  by  night  and  by  day,  and  the  seed 
should  grow  and  shoot  up,  he  knoweth  not  how. 
(28)  For  the  earth  bringeth  forth  the  fruit ;  first  28 
the  plant,  and  subsequently  the  ear,  and  at  last  the 
complete  wheat  in  the  car.     (29)  And  when  the 
fruit  is  ripe,'^  immediately  cometh  the  sickle,  be- 
cause the  harvest  hath  arrived. — (30)  And  he  said : 
To  what  shall  we  liken  the  kingdom  of  God?  and 
with  what  similitude^  shall  we  compare  it?     (31) 
It  is  like  a  grain  of  mustard  seed  which,  when  it 
is  sown  in  the  earth,  is  the  least  of  all  seeds  sown 


23 

24 


29 


30 
31 


MARK,    V. 


69 


32  on  the  earth ;  (32)  and  when  it  is  sown  it  spring- 
eth  np,  and  becometh  greater  than  all  herbs,  and 
produceth  great  branches,  so  that  birds  can  lodge 

33  under  its  shadow. — (33)  And  by  many  such 
similitudes, — similitudes  such  as  they  could  hear, 

34  — Jesus  discoursed  with  the  people.  (34)  And 
without  similitudes  he  did  not  converse  with  them: 
but  to  his  disciples,  between  himself  and  them,  he 
explained  every  thing. 

35  And  he  said  to  them,  the  same  day  at  evening: 

36  Let  us  pass  over  to  the  other  side.  (36)  And  they 
sent  away  the  multitudes :  and  they  conducted 
him  in  the  ship  as  he  was.     And  there  were  also 

37  with  liim  other  little  ships.  (37)  And  there  was  a 
great  tempest  and  wind :  and  the  waves  beat  upon 

38  the  ship,  and  it  was  near  being  filled.  (38)  And 
Jesus  was  asleep  on  a  pillow  in  the  hinder  part  of 
the  ship.  And  they  came  and  awoke  him,  and 
said  to  him:  Our  Rabbi,  carest  thou  not,  that  we 

39  perish?  (39)  And  he  arose,  and  rebuked  the 
wind,  and  said  to  the  sea:  Cease;  be  still.     And 

40  the  wind  ceased,  and  there  was  a  great  calm.  (40'^ 
And  he  said  to  them :  Why  were  ye  so  fearful  r 

41  and  why  have  ye  not  faith  ?  (41)  And  they 
feared  with  great  fear:  and  they  said,  one  to 
another:  Who  is  this,  that  even  the  winds  and 
the  sea  obey  him  ! 

V.      And  he  came  to  the  other  side  of  the  sea,  to  the 

2  country  of  the  Gadarenes.^  (2)  And  as  he  went  out 
of  the  ship,  there  met  him  from  the  place  of  sepul- 

3  chres  a  man  in  whom  was  an  unclean  spirit.''  (3) 
And  he  dwelt  in  the  place  of  sepulchres  ;  and  no 

4  one  could  confine  him  with  chains:  (4J  because, 
as  often  as  he  had  been  confined  with  tetters  and 
chains,  he  had  broken  the  chains  and  burst  the 

5  fetters :  and  no  one  could  subdue  him.  (5)  And 
continually,  b}''  night  and  by  day,  he  was  in  the 
place  of  sepulchres,  and  cried  and  wounded  himself 

6  with  stones.     (6)  And  when  he  saw  Jesus  at  a 

7  distance,  he  ran  and  worshipped  him;  (7)  and 
cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  said :  What  have  I  to 
do  Avith  thee,  Jesus,  thou  Son  of  the  High  God  ? 
I  adjure  thee  by  God,  that  thou  torment  me  not. 

8  (8)  For  he  had  said  to  him :  Come  out  of  the  man, 

9  thou  unclean  spirit.    (9)  And  he  demanded  of  him: 


Sy.  U 


^ 


"Sy. 


70 


MARK,    V. 


''  or,  the  land. 
'Sy._^ 


E  Sy.  /ie  0/  Ihe 
demons. 


^  Sy.  (l/te  ten 
cities. 

lAjQin 

"^  Sy.  w*>"|cL» 


'  or,  multitude. 


AYhat  is  thy  name?     And  lie  replied  to  laim  :  Our 
name  is  Legion  ;<=  for  we  are  many.     (10)  And  he  10 
besouo'ht  him  much,  that  he  would  not  send  him 
out  oi"  the  country.'!     (11)  And  there  was  there  11 
b}'"  the  mountain,  a  great  herd  of  swine  grazing. 

(12)  And  the  demons''  besought  him,  and  said:  Send  12 
us  upon  those  swine,  that  we  may  enter  them. 

(13)  And  he  permitted  them.     And  those  unclean  13 
spirits*'  went  out,  and  entered  the  swine :  and  the 
herd,  of  about  two  thousand,  ran  to  a  precipice, 
and  fell  into  the  sea,  and  were  strangled  in  the 
waters.    (14)  And  they  who  tended  them,  fled  and  14 
told  [it]  in  the  city  and  in  the  villages :  and  they 
came  out  to  see  what  had  occurred.     (15)*  And  15 
they  came  to  Jesus,  and  saw  him  in  whom  the 
demons  had  been, — him  in  whom  had  been  the 
legion, — clothed,  and  sober,  and  sitting;  and  they 
were  afraid.     (16)  And  those  who  had  seen   [it]  16 
told  them  how  it  occurred  to  him  who  had  the 
demons,  and  also  concerning  the  swine.    (17)  And  17 
they  began  to  request  him,  that  he  would  go  from 
their  border.     (18)  And  as  he  ascended  the  ship,  18 
the  late  demoniacs  requested  that  he  might  con- 
tinue with  him.     (19)  And  he  sufiered  him  not,  19 
but  said  to  him:  Go  home  to  thy  people,  and  tell 
them  what  the  Lord  hath  done  for  thee,  and  hath 
compassionated   thee.      (20)    And   he   went,    and  20 
began  to  publish  in  Decapolis,^  what  Jesus  had 
done  for  him.     And  they  were  all  amazed. 

And   when  Jesus  had   passed  by   ship  to  the  21 
other    side,    great    multitudes    again     assembled 
about  him  as   he   was   on   the  shore  of  the  sea. 
(22)  And   one  of  the  rulers'  of  the  synagogue,  22 
whose  name  was  Jairus,'^  came,  and,  on  seeing  him, 
fell  at  his  feet,  (23)  and  besought  him  much,  and  23 
said  to  him :  My  daughter  is  very  sick ;  but  come 
and  lay  thy  hand  on  her,  and  she  will  be  cured, 
and  will  live.     (2-4)  And  Jesus  went  with  him;  24 
and  a  great  company^  attended  him,  and  pressed 
upon  him. — (25)  And  a  woman  who  had  had  a  25 
defluxion  of  blood  twelve  years,  (26)  and  who  had  26 
suffered  much  from  many  physicians,  and  had  ex- 
pended all  she  possessed,  and  was  not  profited,  but 
was  even  the  more  afflicted;  (27)  when  she  heard  27 
of  Jesus,  came  behind  him  in  the  press  of  the 
crowd,  and  touched  his  garment.     (28)    For  she  28 


MARK,    VI. 


71 


said :    If  I  but   toucli  his   garment,   I  sliall  live. 

29  (29)  And  immediately  the  fountain  of  her  blood 
dried  up ;  and  she  felt  in  her  body  that  she  was 

30  healed  of  her  plague.  (30)  And  Jesus  at  once 
knew  in  himself,  that  virtue  had  issued  from  him  : 
and  he   turned  to  the   throng,   and  said:    Who 

31  touched  my  clothes?  (31)  And  his  disciples  said 
to  him :  Thou  seest  the  tln-ongs  that  press  upon 

32  thee ;  and  sayest  thou,  Who  touched  me  ?  (32) 
And  he  looked  around,  to  see  who  had  done  this. 

33  (33)  And  the  woman,  fearing  and  trembling,  for 
she  knew  what  had  taken  place  in  her,  came  and 
fell  down  before  him,  and  told  him  all  the  truth. 

3-1  (34)  And  he  said  to  her :  My  daughter,  thy  faith 
hath  made  thee  live :  go  in  peace ;  and  be  thou 

35  healed  of  thy  plague. — (35)  And  while  he  was 
speaking,  some  domestics  of  the  ruler  of  the 
synagogue  came,  and  said :  Thy  daughter  is 
dead  :  why  therefore  troublest  thou  the  teacher  7"^ 

36  (36)  But  Jesus  heard  the  word  they  spoke,  and  said 
to  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue:    Fear  not;    only 

37  believe.  (37)  And  he  suffered  no  one  to  go  with 
him,  except  Simon  Cephas,"  and  James,  and  John 

38  the  brother  of  James.  (38)  And  they  came  to  the 
house  of  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue ;  and  he  saw, 
that   they  were  in  a  tumult,   and   weeping,  and 

39  howling.  (39)  And  he  entered  in  and  said  to 
them:  Why  are  ye  in  a  tumult,  and  weep?     The 

40"  maid  is  not  dead,  but  is  asleep.  (40)  And  they 
laughed  at  him.  But  Jesus  put  them  all  out. 
And  he  took  the  maid's  father,  and  her  mother, 
and  those  that  accompanied  him,  and  entered  into 

41  where  the  maid  lay.     (41)  And  he  took  the  maid's 

42  hand,  and  said  to  her :  Maiden,  arise.^  (42)  And 
immediately  the  maid  arose,  and  walked ;  for  she 
was  twelve  years  old.     And  they  were  astonished 

43  with  a  great  astonishment.  (43)  And  he  enjoined 
it  upon  them  much,  that  no  one  should  know  of  it. 
And  he  directed,  that  they  should  give  her  to 
eat. 


VI. 
•  2 


And  Jesus  departed  from  there  and  came  to  his 
own  city,  and  his  disciples  attended  him.  (2)  And 
when  the  sabbath  came,  he  began  to  teach  in 
the  synagogue.  And  many  who  heard  [him] 
were    astonished,    and    said :    Whence   hath    he 


Sy  "ji  c^\v> 


Gr.  Peter. 


o  Sy.  ■jAA^2 


72 


MARK,    VI. 


Sv.  IX!^ 


^  or,  in  his 
house. 


or,  small  coins. 


Sy.U^ 


^  Sy.  ?ii)wse  q/* 

prisoners. 
E  i.  e.  /£»  ?«j/e. 


obtained  these  tilings?     And,  what  wisdom  is  this, 
which  is   given  to  him!    and  that   such   mighty 
works'^  are  done  by  his  hands  1     (3)  Is  not  this     3 
the  carpenter,  the  son  of  Mary,  and  the  brother  of 
James  and  of  Joses  and  of  Judas  and  of  Simon? 
And  are  not  his  sisters  here  with  us?     And  they 
were  stumbled  in  him.     (4)    And  Jesus  said  to     4 
them :  There  is  no  prophet  who  is  little,  except 
in  his  own  city,  and  among  his  kindred,  and  at 
home.**     (5)  And  he  could  not  there  do  even  one     5 
mighty  work,  except  that  he  laid  his  hand  on  a 
few  sick,  and  healed  them.     (6)  And  he  wondered     6 
at  the  defect  of  their  faith.      And   he   travelled 
about  the  villages  and  taught. 

And  he  called  his  twelve,  and  began  to  send     7 
them  forth,   two   and  two ;    and   he   gave   them 
authority  over  unclean  spirits,  to  cast  them  out. 
(8)  And  he  commanded  them  to  take  nothing  for     8 
the  journey,  except  a  staff  only;  neither  a  wallet, 
nor  bread,  nor  brass«=  in  their  purses ;  (9)  but  to     9 
be  shod  with  sandals,  and  not  put  on  two  coats. 
(10)  And  he  said  to  them:  Into  whatever  house  10 
ye  enter,  there  abide  till  ye  leave  the  place.     (11)  11 
And  whoever  will  not  receive  you,  nor  hear  you, 
when  ye  go  out  from  that  place  shake  off  the  dust 
that  is  under  your  feet,  for  a  testimony  to  them. 
Verily  I  say  to  you,  There  will  be  comfort  for 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  in  the  day  of  judgment, 
rather  than  for  that  city.     (12)  And  they  went  12 
out   and   proclaimed,  that    [men]    should  repent. 
(13)  And  they  cast  out  many  demons,  and  many  13 
of  the  sick  they  anointed  with  oil,  and  healed  them. 

And  Herod  the  king  heard  of  Jesus, — for  his  14 
name  had  become  known  to  him, — and  he  said: 
John  the  Ba})tizer  hatli  risen  from  the  dead :  and 
therefore  it  is,   mighty  deeds'^  are  done  by  him. 
(15)  Others  said :  lie  is  Elijah  :e  and  others :  He  15 
is  a  prophet,  like  one  of  the  prophets.     (16)  But  16 
when  Herod  heard  [of  him],  he  said :  He  is  that 
John  whose  head  I  struck  off:  he  is  risen  from  the 
dead.     (17)  For  Ilerod  had  sent  and  seized  John,  17 
and  bound  him  in  prison, f  on  account  of  Uerodias, 
his  brother  Phili})'s  wife,  whom  he  had  taken.? 
(18)  For  John  had  said  to  Ilerod :  It  is  not  lawful  18 
for  thee  to  take  tliy  brother's  wife.      (19)  And  19 
Herodias  herself  was  an  enemy  to  him,  and  wished 


MARK,    VI. 


73 


20  to  kill  him,  but  was  not  able.  (20)  For  Herod 
was  afraid  of  John,  because  he  knew  him  to  be  a 
just  and  hoi 3^  man:  and  he  observed  him,  and 
gave   ear  to  him  in    many   things   and    did    [the 

21  things],  and  he  heard  him  with  satisfaction.  (21) 
And  there  was  a  noted  day,  when  Herod  made 
a  supper,  in  the  house' of  his  nativity,  for  his 
nobles  and  the  chiliarchs  and  the  chiefs  of  Galilee. 

22  (22)  And  the  daughter  of  Herodias  came  in,  and 
danced  ;  and  she  pleased  Herod  and  those  reclining 
with  him.  And  the  king  said  to  the  maid:  Ask 
of  me  what  thou  pleasest,  and  I  will  give  it  thee. 

23  (23)  And  he  swore  to  her:  Whatever  thou  shalt 
ask,  I  Avill  give  thee,  even  to  the  half  of  my  king- 
dom. (24)  And  she  went  out,  and  said  to  her 
mother:  What  shall  I  ask  of  him?  She  said  to 
her:  The  head  of  John  the  Baptizer.  (25)  And 
she  soon  entered  with  eagerness  to  the  king,  and 
said:  I  desire  that  thou,  this  hour,  give  me  in  a 
dish  the  head  of  John  the  Baptizer.  (26)  And  it 
pained  the  king  greatly ;  yet,  on  account  of  the 
oath,  and  on  account  of  the  guests,  he  would  not 
denyh  her :  (27)  and  the  king  sent  immediately  an 
executioner,'  and  commanded  [him]  to  bring  the 
head  of  John.  And  he  went,  and  struck  off  the 
head  of  John  in  the  prison  ;  (28)  and  brought  it 
on  a  dish,  and  gave  it  to  the  maid ;  and  the  maid 
gave  it  to  her  mother.  (29)  And  his  disciples 
heard  [of  it] ;  and  they  came  and  took  up  the 
corpse,  and  laid  it  in  a  sepulchre.'^ 

And  the  legates^  assembled  before  Jesus,  and 

told  him   all  they  had  done,   and  all   they  had 

(31)  And  he  said  to  them:  Come,  let  us 

a  desert  by  ourselves,  and  rest  a  little. 

For  there  were  many  going  and  coming,  and  they 

32  had  not  opportunity  even  to  eat  bread.  (32)  And 
they  went  by  ship  to  a  desert  place  by  themselves. 

33  (33)  But  many  saw  them,  as  they  departed,  and 
knew    them ;    and   from   all  the   cities,    they   ran 

34  thither  by  land  before  him.  (34)  And  Jesus  dis- 
embarked and  saw  great  multitudes :  and  he  com- 
passionated them,  because  they  were  like  sheep 
having  no  shepherd.     And  he  began  to  teach  them 

35  many  things.  (35)  And  when  the  time  was 
advanced, "1  his  disciples  came  to  him,  and  said  to 
him:  This  is  a  desert  place,  and  the  time  is  ad- 


24 


25 


26 


27 


28 


29 


30 
31 


taught, 
go  into 


''  Sy.  defraud. 
■Sy. 

=  Gr. 

or,  -place  of 
burial. 

Sy.  Vk/jN* 
Gr.  d-jrotfoXoi. 


"  Sy.  great. 


74 


MARK,    VI. 


Sy.  "imJQ-vjJ 


o  Sy.  ^,.1-.? 


Sy. 


.  1  .  g^r>  n 


Sy. 

1^    AxTi 


Sy.  torturing. 


«  Sy.  </i!d-. 
'  Sy.  rCCU-^ 


vanced.     (36)   Dismiss  them,  that  thej  may  go  36 
into  the  fields"  around  us  and  into  the  villages, 
and  may  buy  themselves   bread ;   for  they  have 
nothing  to  eat.     (37)  And  he  said  to  them  :  Give  37 
yc  them  to  eat.     They  say  to  him  :  Shall  we  go 
and   buy    bread   of  the    value   of   two   hundred 
denarii,"  and  give  them  to  eat?    (38)  And  he  said  38 
to  theVn :  Go,  see  how  many  loaves  ye  have  here. 
And  when  they  had  seen,  they  say  to  him:  Five 
loaves   and  two   fishes.     (39)  And  he  bid   them  39 
make  the  people  recline  on  the  grass  by  companies. 
(40)  And  they  reclined,  by  companies  of  a  hundred,  40 
and  of  fifty.     (41)  And  he  took  the  five  loaves  41 
and  the  two  fishes,  and  looked  towards  heaven, 
and  blessed  and  brake  the  bread,  and  gave  to  his 
disciples  to   set  before  them:    and  they  divided 
[also]  the  two  fishes  among  them  all.     (42)  And  42 
they  all  ate,  and  were  satisfied.     (43)   And  they  43 
took   np   twelve   baskets?  full  of  the  fragments 
and  of  the  fishes.     (44)  And  they  who  had  eaten  44 
bread  were  five  thousand  men.     (45)  And  he  im-  45 
mediately  constrained  his  disciples  to  take  ship, 
and  go  before  him  to  the  other  side,  to  Bethsaida,"^ 
while*   he   dismissed   the   multitudes. — (46)    And  46 
when  he  had  dismissed  them,  he  went  to  a  moun- 
tain to  pray.     (47)  And  when  evening  came,  the  47 
ship  was  in  the  middle  of  the  sea,  and  he  alone  on 
the  land.     (48)  And  he  saw  them  straining^  them-  48 
selves  in  rowing ;  for  the  wind  was  against  them. 
And  in  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night,  Jesus  came 
to   them   walking    on   the    waters;     and    he    was 
disposed  to  pass  by  them.     (49)   And  they  saw  49 
him   walking  on  the  waters,  and  they  supposed 
that  the  appearance  was  a  spectre  :  and  they  cried 
out.     (50)  For  they  all  saw  him,  and  were  afraid.  50 
And  immediately  lie  spoke  with  them,  and  said  to 
them:  Take  courage;  it  is  I ;  fear  not.    (51)  And  51 
he  entered  into  the  ship  to  them;  and  the  wind 
ceased.       And    they   were    greatly  amazed,    and 
astonished  among  themselves.     (52)  For  they  did  52 
not  learn  by  the  bread ;  because  their  heart  was 
stupid.^ — (53)  And  when  they  had  passed  to  the  53 
other  shore,  they  came  to  the  land  of  Gennesaret.^ 
(54)  And  when  they  went  out  of  the  ship,  immcdi-  54 
ately  the  men  of  the  place  knew  him.     {bb)  And  55 
they  ran  through  all  that  region,  and  began  to 


MARK,    VII. 


VO 


bring  forth  tliem  that  were  sick,  bearing  them  on 
56  beds  to  where  they  heard  he  was.  (56)  And 
wherever  he  entered  into  villages  or  cities,  the  sick 
were  laid  in  the  streets :  and  they  besought  him, 
that  they  might  touch  but  the  extremity  of  his 
raiment.  And  all  they  that  touched  him,  were 
healed. 

VII.     And  there  gathered  about  him  Pharisees  and 

2  Scribes,  who  had  come  from  Jerusalem.  (2)  And 
they  saw  some  of  his  disciples  eating  bread,  with 

3  their  hands  unwashed ;  and  they  censured  it.  (3) 
For  all  the  Jews  and  the  Pharisees,  unless  they 
carefully  wash  their  hands,  do  not  eat;   because 

4  thc}^  hold  fist  the  tradition  of  the  Elders.  (4)  And 
[coming]  from  the  market-place,  except  they  bap- 
tize,^ they  do  not  eat.  And  there  are  many  other 
things  which  they  have  received  to  observe,  [such 
as]   tlie  baptisms^   of  cups,  and  of  pots,    and  of 

5  brazen  vessels,  and  of  couches.  (5)  And  the 
Scribes  and  Pharisees  asked  him :  Why  walk  not 
tliy  disciples  according  to  the  tradition  of  the 
Elders,  but  eat  bread  with  their  hands  unwashed? 

6  (6)  And  he  said  to  them :  Well  did  Isaiah  the 
prophet  prophecy  concerning  you,  ye  hypocrites; 
as  it  is  written :  "^This  people  honoreth  me  with  its 

7  lips,  but  their  heart  is  very  far  from  me.  (7)  And 
in  vain  do  they  give  me  reverence,  while  teaching 

8  as  doctrines  the  precepts  of  men.  (8)  For  ye  have 
forsaken  the  commandment  of  God,  and  hold  fast 
the  tradition  of  men,  the  baptisms  of  cups,  and  of 

9  pots,  and  many  things  like  these.  (9)  He  said 
[also]  to  them :  Full  Veil  do  ye  spurn  the  precept 

10  of  God,  that  ye  may  establish  your  tradition !  (10) 
For  Moses  said:  Honor  thy  father  and  thy  mother; 
and  whoever  shall  revile  his  flither  or  his  mother, 

11  shall  surely  die.^  (11)  But  ye  say:  If  a  man  say 
to  his  father  or  to  his  mother,  Be  it  my  oblation, 

12  whatever  thou  mayest  gain  from  me :  (12)  then  ye 
suffer  him  not  to  do  any  thing  for  his  lather  or  his 

13  mother.  (13)  And  ye  reject  the  word  of  God,  on 
account   of  the   tradition   which  ye  hand  down. 

11  And  many  things  like  these,  ye  do.— (14)  And 
Jesus  called  all  the  multitude,  and  said  to  them: 

15  Hear,  all  ye;  and  understand.  (15)  There  is 
nothing  without  a  man  which,  by  entering  him,  can 


•>  Sy. 


or,  dying  die. 


76 


MARK,    VII. 


^  or,  parable. 


or,  it. 


Sv. 


^  Sy.  looril. 


•>  Sy.  <7ie  toi  ci7- 


Sy.  _K»AaZl 


pollute  liim.      But  that  which  cometh  out  of  him, 
that  it  is  that  poUuteth  a  man.      (16)    AVhoever  16 
hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear. — (17)  And  when  17 
Jesus  had  entered  the  house,  apart  from  the  multi- 
tude, his  disciples  asked  him  about  this  similitude.'^ 
(18)  And  he  said  to  them:    Are  ye  likewise  so  18 
undiscerning?     Do  ye  not  know,   that   whatever 
from   without   entereth  into  a  man,  cannot  defile 
him?     (19)  For  it  doth  not  enter  into  his  heart,  19 
but  into  his  belly,  and  is  thrown  into  the  diges- 
tive process,   which   carries   off  all  that  is  eaten. 
(20)  But  that  which  proceedeth  from  a  man,  that  20 
defileth  a  man.      (21)  For  from  within,  from  the  21 
heart   of   men,  proceed    evil    thoughts,  adultery, 
whoredom,     (22)    theft,    murder,    avarice,    malice,  22 
deceit,  lasciviousness,  an  evil  eye,  reviling,  haugh- 
tiness, folly.     (23)  All  these  evil  things  come  from  23 
within,  and  defile  a  man. 

Thence  Jesus  arose,  and  went  to  the  border  of  24 
Tyre  and  Sidon.     And  he  entered  a  house,   and 
wished  no  man  to  know  him;^  but  he  could  not 
be  concealed.      (25)    For  immediately  a  woman,  25 
whose  daughter  had  an  unclean  spirit,   heard  of 
him;  and  she  came,  and  fell  before  his  feet,  (26)  26 
(the   woman    was   a   Gentile    from    Phenicia    of 
Syria),f  and  besought  him,  that  he  would  expel 
the  demon  from  her  daughter.      (27)    Jesus  said  27 
to  her :    Permit  the  children  first  to  be  satisfied ; 
for   it    is    not    becoming,    to    take    the    children's 
bread  and  cast  it  to  dogs.     (28)  And  she  replied,  28 
and   said    to    him :    Yes,  my  Lord :    and  yet  the 
dogs  under  the  table  eat  the  children's  crumbs. 
(29)  Jesus  said  tO'  her :  Go  thou ;   because  of  this 
speech, g    the    demon    hath    departed    from    thy 
daughter.      (30)  And  she  went  to  her  house,  and 
found  her  daughter  lying  on  a  bed,  and  the  demon 
gone  from  her. 

Again  Jesus  departed  from  the  border  of  Tyre  31 
and  Sidon,  and  came  to  the  sea  of  Galilee,  to  the 
border  of  Decapolis.''     (32)  And  they  brought  to  32 
him  a  deaf  and  stammering  man,   and  besought 
him  to  lay  his  hand  on  him.    (33)  And  he  led  him  33 
aside    from    the    multitude,   and    put    his    fingers 
into  his   ears,   and  spit,    and  touched  his  tongue, 
(34)  and  looked  towards  heaven,  and  sighed,  and  34 
saiel  to  him:   Be  opened.'     (35)  And  immediately  35 


29 


30 


his  ears  were  opened,  and  tlie  bond  of  his  tongue 

36  was  loosed,  and  he  spake  plainly.  (36)  And  he 
charged  them  to  tell  no  man  of  it :  and  the 
more  he  charged  them,  the  more  they  proclaimed 

37  it.  (37)  And  they  admired  exceedingly,  and  said: 
He  doetli  every  thing  excellently:  he  maketh 
the  deaf  to  hear,  and  the  speechless  to  talk. 

YIII.  And  in  those  days,  when  the  multitude  was 
great,  and  had  nothing  to  eat,  he  called  his  dis- 

2  ciples,  and  said  to  them :  (2)  I  compassionate  this 
multitude ;   for,  lo,  three  days  have  they  continued 

3  with  me,  and  they  have  nothing  to  eat.  (3)  And 
if  I  send  them  to  their  homes  fasting,  they  will 
faint  by  the  way:    for  some  of  them  have  come 

4  from  a  great  distance.  (4)  His  disciples  say  to 
him :  Whence  can  one,  here  in  the  desert,  satisfy 

5  all  these  with  bread?  (5)  And  he  asked  them: 
How  many  loaves  have  ye?     They  say  to  him, 

6  Seven.  (6)  And  he  directed  the  multitudes  to 
recline  on  the  gTound:  and  he  took  the  seven 
loaves,  and  blessed,  and  brake,  and  gave  to  his 
disciples   to   set   forth ;    and  they  set  before  the 

7  multitudes.  (7)  And  there  were  a  few  fishes; 
and  them  he  also  blessed,  and  ordered  them  set 

8  forth.  (8)  And  they  ate,  and  were  satisfied:  and 
they   took   up   seven   baskets   of    the    remaining 

9  fragments.  (9)  And  the  men  who  had  eaten, 
were  about  four  thousand:  and  he  sent  them 
away. 

10  And  immediately  he  entered  a  ship,  with  his 
disciples,  and    came  to   the    place   Dalmanutha."- 

11  (11)  And  the  Pharisees  came  out,  and  began  to 
dispute   with  him ;    and,   to  tempt  him,  they  de 

12  manded  of  him  a  sign  from  heaven.  (12)  And 
he  sighed  with  his  breath, ^  and  said:  Why  doth 
this  generation  seek  after  a  sign  ?  Verily  I  say 
to  you,  No  sign  will  be  given  to  this  generation. 

13  (13)   And  he    left   them,   and  embarked    in   the 

14  ship ;  and  they  passed  to  the  other  shore. — (14) 
And  they  had  forgotten  to  take  bread  with  them, 
and  had   but  a  single   cakc'^    in    the   ship   with 

15  them.  (15)  And  he  charged  them,  and  said  to 
them :    Take  heed,  and  beware  of  the  leaven  of 

16  the  Pharisees,  and  of  the  leaven  of  Herod.  (16) 
And  they  reasoned  one  with  another,  and  said : 


Sv. 


Sy.  spirit. 


Sy.V 


^'A 


78 


MARK,    VIII. 


Sv. 


"1,-L*      AjLlii 


e  Gr.  Peter. 


Sy.  the  word. 
Gr.  Peter. 


Gr 

Sv. 


Peter. 


18 
19 


20 


21 


23 


24 
25 

26 


It  is,  because  we  have  no  bread.  (17)  And  Jesus  17 
knew  [it],  and  said  to  tliera :  Why  reason  ye, 
because  ye  have  no  bread  ?  Do  ya  still  not  know, 
nor  understand?  How  long  will  your  heart  be 
hard?  (18)  and  ye  have  eyes,  but  see  not? 
and  have  ears,  but  hear  not,  nor  reflect?  (19) 
When  I  broke  the  five  loaves  to  five  thousand, 
how  many  baskets  full  of  the  fi-agraents  took  ye 
up?  They  say  to  him:  Twelve.  (20)  He  sai'th 
to  them:  And  when  the  seven  to  four  thousand, 
how  many  baskets  full  of  the  fragments  took  ye 
up?  They  say:  Seven.  (21)  He  saith  to  them: 
Why  is  it  that,  to  this  time,  ye  do  not  consider  ? 

And  he  came  to  Bethsaida  'A  and  they  brought  22 
to  him  a  blind  man,  and  besought  him  to  touch 
him.  (23)  And  he  took  the  blind  man  by  the 
hand,  and  led  him  out  of  the  village,  and  spit 
on  his  eyes,  and  laid  on  his  hand :  and  asked  him, 
what  he  saw.  (24)  And  he  gazed,  and  said:  I 
see  men  like  trees  which  walk.  (25)  Again  he 
laid  his  hand  on  his  eyes,  and  he  was  recovered, 
and  saw  every  thing  plainly.  (26)  And  he  sent 
him  to  his  house,  and  said  to  him :  Neither 
enter  into  the  village,  nor  tell  any  person  in  the 
village. 

And  Jesus  and  his  disciples  went  to  the  villages  27 
of  Cijssarea  Philippi.  And  he  asked  his  disciples 
by  the  wa}^,  and  said  to  them :  Who,  do  men  say 
of  me,  that  I  am  ?  (28)  And  they  said  to  him :  28 
That  [thou  art]  John  the  Baptizer;  and  others: 
That  [thou  art]  Elijah;  and  others:  That  [thou 
art]  one  of  the  prophets.  (29)  Jesus  said  to  them : 
And  who,  do  ye  yourselves  say  of  me,  that  I  am  ? 
Simonc  replied,  and  said  to  him:  Thou  art  the 
Messiah,  the  Son  of  the  living  God.  (30)  And  he 
charged  them,  that  they  should  say  [this]  of  him  to 
no  person. — (31)  And  he  began  to  teach  them, 
that  the  Son  of  man  was  about  to  suffer  much,  and 
be  rejected  by  the  Elders  and  by  the  chief  priests 
and  by  the  Scribes,  and  be  killed,  and  rise  on  the 
third  day.  (32)  And  he  spoke  out  the  thing*"  dis- 
tinctly. ^  And  Cephas?  took  him,  and  began  to 
rebuke  him.  (33)  But  he  turned,  and  looked 
upon  his  disciples,  and  rebuked  Simon,''  and  said : 
Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan :'  for  thou  dost  not 
consider  what  is  of  God,  but  what  is  of  men. — 


29 


0 


32 


MARK,     IX. 


79 


oO 


36 

37 

38 


34  (34)  And  Jesus  called  the  multitude,  together  with 
his  disciples,  and  said  to  them :  Whoever  will  come 
after  me,  let  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his 
cross,  and  come  after  me.  (35)  For,  whoever  will 
preserve  his  life,''  shall  lose  it ;  and  whoever  will 
lose  his  life  on  my  account,  and  on  account  of  my 
tidings,  1  shall  preserve  it.  (36)  For,  what  will  a 
man  be  profited,  if  he  gain  the  whole  world,""  and 
lose  his  life  ?Q  (37)  Or  what  will  a  man  give  in 
exchange  for  his  life  ?  (38)  For,  whoever  shall 
be  ashamed  of  me,  and  of  my  words, «  in  this  sinful 
and  adulterous  generation,  of  him  also  will  the 
Son  of  man  be  ashamed,  when  he  cometh  in  the 

IX.glory  of  his  Father,  with  his  holy  angels. — [IX.] 
And  he  said  to  them :  Verily  I  say  to  you.  There 
are  some  standing  here,  who  will  not  taste  of  death, 
until  they  shall  see  the  kingdom  of  God  to  be 
coming  with  power. 

2  And  after  six  days,  Jesus  took  Cephas^  and 
James  and  John,  and  led  them  to  a  high  moun- 
tain, apart ;    and  was  transformed   before   them.^ 

8  (3)  And  his  raiment  shone,  and  was  very  white, 
like  snow,  so  as  men  on  earth  can  never  whiten. 

4  (4)    And    there    appeared    to    them    Moses   and 

5  Elijah,  in  conversation  Avith  Jesus.  (5)  And 
Cephas«=  said  to  him :  Eabbi,  it  is  delightful  for  us 
to  be  here.  And  let  us  make  three  booths ;  one 
for  thee,  and  one  for  Moses,  and  one  for  Elijah. 

6  (6)  But  he  did  not  know  wlaat  he  said,  for  they 

7  were  in  trepidation.  (7)  And  there  was  a  cloud, 
and  it  overshadowed  them.  And  a  voice  issued 
from  the  cloud,  which  said :  This  is  my  beloved 

8  Son.  Hear  ye  him.  (8)  And  suddenly,  when  the 
disciples  looked  up,  they  saw  no  one  with  them, 

9  except  Jesus  only, — (9)  And  as  they  descended  the 
mountain,  he  commanded  them  to  tell  no  man 
what  they  had  seen,   till  after  the   Sou   of  man 

10  should  be  risen  from  the  dead.  (10)  And  they 
kept  that  saying  in  their  mind  j^  and  inquired. 
What  doth  this  saying  mean :  "  When  he  shall  be 

11  risen  from  the  dead  !"  (11)  And  they  asked  him, 
and   said :     Why   then   do   the  Scribes  say,  that 

12  Elijah  must  first  come?  (12)  He  said  to  them: 
Elijah  [truly]  first  cometh,  to  prepare  all  things: 
and,  as  it  is  written  of  the  Son  of  man,  he  will 


'  Sy.  »*Z;.oro 
■"Sy-l^oNs 

-  Sy.  m  «  CM 
°  or,  teachings. 


Gr.  Peter. 


Sy.  their  eyes. 


"=  Gr.  Peter. 


or,  among 

themselves. 


80 


MARK,    IX. 


*  Sy  ]i  g^VVo 


Sy.  JCDJ-^ 

Gr.  75V  Off. 


13 


19 


20 


suffer  much,  and  be  rejected.     (13)  But  I  say  to  13 
you:  That  Elijah  hath  come;  and  they  have  done 
to  him  all  that  they  desired,  as  it  was  written  of 
him. 

And  when  he  came  to  his  disciples,  he  saw  a  1-1 
great  multitude  with  them,  and  the  Scribes  dis- 
puting with  them.      (15)    And   immediately    the  15 
multitude  saw  him,  and  were  surprised :  and  they 
ran  and  saluted   him.      (16)    And  he  asked  the  16 
Scribes ;    What   were   ye    disputing   with    them  ? 
(17)  And  one  of  the  multitude  replied,  and  said :  17 
Teacher, e  I  have  brought  to  thee  my  son,  who  hath 
a  spirit  that  will  not  speak.     (18)  And  wherever 
he  seizeth  him,  he  shaketh  and  teareth  him :  and 
he  gnasheth  his  teeth,  and  pineth  away.     And  I 
spoke  to  thy  disciples,  to  cast  him  out ;  and  they 
could  not.    (19)  Jesus  answered,  and  said  to  them : 
O  incredulous  generation!     How  long  shall  I  be 
with  you  ?  how  long  bear  with  you  ?     Bring  him 
to  me.    (20)  And  they  brought  him  to  him.    And 
when  the  spirit  saw  him,  immediately  he  shook 
him ;  and  he  fell  upon  the  ground,  and  wallowed 
and  foamed.    (21)  And  Jesus  asked  his  father,  how  21 
long  a  time  he  had  been  thus.     He  said  to  him : 
Lo,  from  his  childhood.     (22)  And  many  times  it  22 
hath  thrown  him  into  the  fire,  and  into  the  water, 
to  destroy  him.     But,  if  thou  canst  do  any  thing, 
aid  me  and  have  compassion  on  me.     (28)  Jesus  23 
said  to  him :  If  thou  canst  believe;  every  thing  can 
be,  to  him  that  believeth.     (2-1)  And  inimediately  2-1 
the  father  of  the  child  cried  out,  while  he  wept  and 
said :  I  believe ;  aid  thou  the  defect  of  my  fiiith. 
(25)  And  when  Jesus  saw  that  the  people  were  25 
running  and  collecting  around  him,  he  rebuked  the 
unclean  spirit,  and  said  to  him :    Thou  deaf  and 
unspeaking  spirit,  I  command  thee,  come  out  of 
him;    and   no  more   enter  him.      (26)    And  the  26 
demon  cried  out  greatly,   and  bruised  him,   and 
came  out.     And  he  was  as  a  dead  person  ;  so  that 
many  would  say,  he  is  dead.     (27)  And  Jesus  took 
him  by  the  hand,  and  raised  him  up. — (28)  And 
when  Jesus  entered  the  house,  his  disciples  asked 
him  privately:  Why  could  not  we  cast  him  out? 
(29)  He  saith  to  them :  This  kind^  can  come  out, 
by  nothing  but  fasting  and  prayer. 

And  when  he  departed  from  there,  they  passed  30 


27 
28 


29 


MARK,    IX. 


81 


5  or,  vxyrd. 


througli  Galilee  :  and  he  desired  that  no  one  might 

31  know  him.  (31)  For  he  taught  his  disciples,  and 
said  to  them:  The  Son  of  man  is  delivered  into 
the  hands  of  men,  and  they  will  kill  him ;  and 
when   he  is  killed,  on  the  tliird  day,  he  will  rise. 

32  (32)  But  they  did  not  understand  that  speech  ;g 
and  they  were  afraid  to  ask  him. 

33  And  they  came  to  Capernaum.  And  when  they 
entered  the  house,  he  asked  them  :  What  disputed 

31  ye  among  yourselves  by  the  way  ?  (34)  And 
they  wei'o  silent ;  for  by  the  way  they  had  con- 
tended with  one   another,  which   should   be  the 

35  great  among  them.  (35)  And  Jesus  sat  down, 
and  called  the  twelve,  and  said  to  them  :  Whoever 
would  be  first,  let  him  be  last  of  all,  and  servitor 

36  to  all.  (36)  And  he  took  a  child,  and  set  him  in 
the  midst,  and  took  him  in  his  arms,  and  said  to 

37  them:  (37)  Whoever  receiveth  one  in  my  name, 
like  this  child,  he  receiveth  me ;  and  he  that 
receiveth  me,  receiveth  not  me    [only],  but  hira 

38  that  sent  me. — (38)  John  said  to  him :  Eabbi,  we 
saw  one  casting  out  demons  in  thy  name,  and  we 

39  forbad  him,  because  he  adhereth  not  to  us.  (39) 
Jesus  said  to  them :  Forbid  him  not ;  for  there  is 
no  one  who  doeth  mighty  works''  in  my  name, 

40  that  can  readily  speak  evil  of  me.     (40)  Whoever 

41  therefore  is  not  against  you,  is  for  you.  (41)  For 
whoever  shall  give  you  to  drink  a  cup  of  water 
onl}',  on  the  ground  that  ye  are  Messiah's  [follow- 
ers], verily  I   say  to   you,  he  will  not  lose  his 

42  reward.  (42)  And  whoever  shall  cause  one  of 
these  little  ones  that  believe  in  me  to  stumble,  it 
were  better  for  him,  if  a  millstone  were  put  to  his 

43  neck,  and  he  cast  into  the  sea.  (43)  And  if  thy 
hand  make  thee  offend,  cut  it  off:  it  is  better  for 
thee  to  enter  into  life  maimed,  than,  having  two 

44  hands,  to  go  into  hell;'    (44)    where  their  worm 

45  dieth  not,  and  their  fire  is  not  extinguished.  (45) 
And  if  thy  foot  make  thee  offend,  cut  it  off":  it  is 
better  for  thee  to  enter  into  life  lamed,  than,  having 

46  two  feet,  to  fall  into  hell ;  (46)  where  their  worm 

47  dieth  not,  and  their  fire  is  not  extinguished.  (47) 
And  if  thy  eye  make  thee  offend,  pluck  it  out :  it 
is  better  for  thee  to  enter  with  one  eye  into  the 
kingdom  of  God,  than,  having  two  eyes,  to  fall  into  y-      ^ 

48  the  hell  of  fire  ;k  (48)  where  their  worm  dieth  not,  |  ''^-   ^^^ 


Sy.]J. 


■  Sy.  IjcTL^ 


sy. 


82 


MARK,    X. 


Sy.l^ 


^  Sy.  ]^  e^Vn 
'  ^^'-         ...      life 


and  their  fire  is  not  extinguished.     (49)  For  every  49 
thing  will  bo  salted  with  tire;  and  every  sacrifice 
will  be  salted  with  salt.    (50)  Salt  is  a  good  thing:  50 
but  if  the  salt  become  insipid,  with  what  will  it  be 
salted?     Let  there  be  salt  in  you:  and  be  ye  in 
peace,  one  with  another. 

And  he  arose  from  there,  and  came  to  the  border  X. 
of  Judiea,   on  the  other  side   the  Jordan.     And 
great  multitudes  came  to  him  there ;  and  again  he 
instructed  them,  as  he  was  accustomed. — (2)  And     2 
the  Pharisees  came  to  him,  and,   tempting  him, 
inquired  if  it  were  lawful  for  a  man  to  divorce 
his  wife.     (3)  He  said  to  them :  What  did  Moses     3 
command  you  ?     (4)  They  said  :  Moses  permitted    4 
us  to  write  a  bill  of  divorce,  and  send  [her]  away. 
(5)  Jesus  answered  and  said  to  them  :  On  account     5 
of  the  hardness  of  your  heart,  Moses  wrote  you 
this  precept.     (6)   But,  from  the  beginning,  God     6 
made  them  a  male  and  a  female.     (7)  Therefore     7 
shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and  his  mother,  and 
adhere  to  his  wife  :  (8)  and  they  two  shall  be  one     8 
flesh.     Wherefore  they  are  not  two,  but  one  flesh. 
(9)    What  therefore  God  hath   conjoined,   let  not     9 
man  separate,     (10)  And  in  the  house,  the  disci-  10 
pies  asked  him  again  of  this  matter.     (11)  And  he  11 
said  to  them  :  Whoever  shall  divorce  his  wife,  and 
take  another,  committcth  adultery.     (12)  And  if  a  12 
woman  shall  leave  her  husband,  and  many  another, 
she  committcth  adultery. 

And  they  brought  little  children^  to  him,  that  13 
he  might  touch  them.     But  his  disciples  rebuked 
tliose  who  brought  them.     (14)  And  when  Jesus  14 
saw  it,  he  was  displeased ;  and  he  said  to  them, 
Suffer  little  children  to  come  to  me,  and  forbid 
them  not ;  for  of  those  like  them  is  the  kingdom 
of  God.     (15)  Verily  I  say  to  you,  That  whoever  15 
doth  not  receive  the  kingdom  of  God,  like  a  little 
child,  shall  not  enter  it.     (16)  And  he  took  them  16 
in  his  arms,  and  laid  his  hand  on  tlicm  and  blessed 
them. 

And  as  he  walked  in  the  Avay,  one  ran  and  fell  17 
upon  his  knees,  and  asked  him,  and  said :  Good 
Teacher,  1^    what    must   I   do,    to    inherit    eternal 
?<=    (18)  Jesus  saith  to  him:    Why  callest  thou  18 
good?      There  is  none   good,  but  one,  God. 


MARK,    X. 


83 


19  (19)  Thou  knowest  the  commandments  ;  thou  shnlt 
not  commit  adultery,  thou  shalt  not  steal,  thou  shalt 
not  kill,  thou  shalt  not  give  false  testimony,  thou 
shalt  not   defraud;    honor   thy   father    and    thy 

20  mother.  (20)  And  he  answered,  and  said  to  him  : 
Teacher,  all  these  have  I  kept  from  my  childhood. 

21  (21)  And  Jesus  looked  on  him,  and  loved  him, 
and  said  to  him :  One  thing  thou  lackest.  Go,  sell 
all  that  thou  possessest,  and  give  to  the  poor,  and 
there  will  be  a  treasure  for  thee  in  heaven ;   and 

22  take  thy  cross,  and  come  after  me.  (22)  And  he 
was  made  sad  by  that  speech,'^  and  went  away 

23  sorrowing :  for  he  possessed  great  riches.  (23) 
And  Jesus  looked  upon  his  disciples,  and  said  to 
them  :  How  hard  for  those  who  possess  wealth,  to 

24  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God !  (21:)  And  the 
disciples  wondered  at  the  remark. ^  And  Jesus 
replied  again,  and  said  to  them :  My  children, 
how  hard  it  is,  for  those  Avho  trust  in  riches,  to 

25  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  (25)  It  is  easier 
for  a  camel  to  enter  the  eye  of  a  needle,  than  for  a 

26  rich  man  to  enter  the  kingdom  of  God.  (26)  And 
they  wondered  the  more,  and  said  among  them- 

27  selves :  Who  can  obtain  life  !  (27)  And  Jesus 
looked  on  them  again,  and  said  to  them :  With 
men,  this  is  not  possible,  but  with  God  [it  is]  ;  for 

28  Avith  God  all  things  are  j^ossible. — (28)  And 
Cephas^  began  to  say :    Lo,   we  have  left  every 

29  thing,  and  have  cleaved  to  thee.  (29)  Jesus 
answered  and  said :  Verily  I  say  to  you.  There  is 
no  man  that  leaveth  houses,  or  brothers  or  sisters, 
or  father  or  mother,  or  wife  or  children,  for  my 

30  sake,  and  for  the  sake  of  my  tidings,  (30)  who  will 
not  receive  a  hundredfold,  here  in  the  present 
time, — houses,  and  brothers  and  sisters,  and  mothers 
and  children,  and  lands,  with  persecution ;  and  in 

31  the  world  to  come  eternal  life.  (31)  But  many 
are  first,  who  will  be  last ;  and  last,  [who  will  be] 
first. 

32  And  as  they  were  in  the  way,  going  up  to  Jerusa- 
lem, Jesus  went  before  them :  and  they  were 
amazed,  and  walked  after  him  with  trembling. 
And  he  took  his  twelve,  and  began  to  tell  them 

33  what  was  to  befall  him.  (33)  Behold,  we  are 
going  to  Jerusalem ;  and  the  oon  of  man  will  be 
delivered  up  to  the  chief  priests  and  the  Scribes ; 


■^  or,  ivord. 


«  or,  7cord. 


<■  Gr.  Peter. 


84 


MARK,    X. 


e  Sy.  ])  g^\V^ 


Sy.  (■»>•» 

Sy. 


Sy.    ..Vn.  ; 


36 
87 

38 


39 


and'thej  will  condemn  him  to  die,  and  Avill  deliver 
him  over  to  the  Gentiles.  (34)  And  they  will  34 
mock  him,  and  will  scourge  him,  and  will  spit  in 
his  face,  and  will  kill  him ;  and  on  the  third  day 
he  will  arise. — (35)  And  James  and  John,  the  sons  35 
of  Zebedee,  came  to  him,  and  said  to  him :  Teacher,? 
we  desire  that  thou  wouldst  do  for  us  all  that  we 
ask.  (36)  He  saith  to  them :  Wliat  would  ye,  that 
I  should  do  for  you?  (37)  They  say  to  him: 
Grant  to  us,  that  one  may  sit  on  thy  right  hand, 
and  the  other  on  thy  left,  in  thy  glory.  (38)  But 
he  said  to  them  :  Ye  know  not  what  ye  ask.  Are 
ye  able  to  drink  the  cup,  of  which  I  drink?  and 
to  be  baptized  with  the  baptism,  that  I  am  baptized 
with  ?  (39)  They  say  to  him :  We  are  able. 
Jesus  saith  to  them :  The  cup  that  I  drink,  ye  will 
drink,  and  the  baptism  that  I  am  baptized  with,  ye 
will  be  baptized  with:  (40)  But  that  ye  should  40 
sit  on  my  right  hand  and  on  my  left,  is  not  mine 
to  give,  except  to  those  for  whom  it  is  prepared. 
(41)  And  when  the  ten  heard  [it],  they  began  to  41 
murmur  against  James  and  Jolm.  (42)  And  Jesus  42 
called  them,  and  said  to  them :  Ye  know,  that 
they  who  are  accounted  chiefs''  of  the  nations,  are 
their  lords ;  and  their  great  men  have  authority* 
over  them.  (43)  But  it  shall  not  be  so  among 
you:  but  he  that  would  be  great  among  you,  must 
be  a  servitor  to  you.  (44)  And  he  of  you  that 
would  be  first,  must  be  servant  to  every  one. 
(45)  And  also  the  Son  of  man  came,  not  to  be 
served,  but  to  serve ;  and  to  give  his  life  a  ran- 
som for  many. 

And  they  came  to  Jericho.  And  as  Jesus  went  46 
out  of  Jericho,  he  and  his  disciples  and  a  great 
multitude ;  Timeus,k  the  son  of  Timeus,  a  blind 
man,  was  sitting  by  the  side  of  the  way,  and  beg- 
ging. (47)  And  he  heard  that  it  was  Jesus  the 
Nazarean ;  and  he  began  to  cry  out,  and  to  say : 
Thou  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me.  (48) 
And  many  rebuked  him,  that  he  might  be  silent. 
But  he  cried  out  the  more,  and  said :  Thou  Son  of 
David,  have  mercy  on  me.  (49)  And  Jesus  stood, 
and  directed  him  to  be  called.  And  they  called 
the  blind  man,  and  said  to  him  :  Take  courage : 
arise,  he  calleth  thee.  (50)  And  the  blind  man 
cast  off  his  garment,  and  arose,  and  went  to  Jesus. 


43 


44 


45 


47 
48 


49 


50 


MARK,    XI. 


85 


51  (51)  Jesus  said  to  him  :  What  wilt  thou,  that  I  do 
for  thee  ?    And  the  blind  man  said  to  him  :  Eabbi, 

52  that  I  may  have  sight.  (52)  And  Jesus  said  to 
him  :  Go  ;  thy  faith  hath  procured  thee  life.  And 
immediately  his  sight  was  restored;  and  he  fol- 
lowed after  him. 

XI.  And  as  they  approached  Jerusalem,  near  by 
Bethphage  and  Bethany,  at  the  mount  of  Olives, 

2  he  sent  two  of  his  disciples,  (2)  and  said  to  them: 
Go  ye  to  the  village  that  is  over  against  us,  and 
as  soon  as  ye  enter  it,  ye  will  find  a  colt  tied,  on 
which  no  person  hath  ridden  :    loose   [him],  and 

3  bring  him  hither.  (3)  And,  if  any  one  say  to  you, 
Why  do  ye  this  ?  Say  ye  to  him :  Because  our 
Lord  hath  need  of  him.     And  immediately  he  will 

4  send  him  hither.  (4)  And  they  went,  and  they 
found  the  colt  tied,  by  the  door,  without  in  the 

5  street.  And  as  tliey  were  loosing  [him],  (5)  some 
of  those  standing  there,  said  to  them  :   What  do 

6  ye,  untying  the  colt  ?  (6)  And  they  said  to  them, 
as  Jesus   had   commanded  them  ;    and  they   per- 

7  mitted  them.  (7)  And  they  brought  the  colt  to 
Jesus,  and  cast  their  garments  upon  him,  and  set 

8  Jesus  upon  him.  (8)  And  many  spread  tlieir  gar- 
ments in  the  way ;  and  others  cut  branches  from 

9  the  trees,  and  strewed  them  in  the  way.  (9)  And 
those  preceding  him,  and  those  following  him, 
shouted  and  said:    Hosanna:  Blessed  is   he  that 

10  Cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  (10)  And 
blessed  is  the  advancing  kingdom  of  our  father 

11  David.  Ilosanna  in  the  highest  [heavens].  (11) 
And  Jesus  entered  Jerusalem  and  the  temple, 
and  surveyed  every  thing.  And  when  evening 
arrived,  he  went  out  to  Bethany  with  the 
twelve. 

12  And  the  following  day,  as  he  left  Bethany,  he 

13  was  hungry  :  (13)  and  he  saw  a  fig-tree  at  a  dis- 
tance, on  which  were  leaves,  and  he  came  to  it,  if 
he  could  find  somewhat  on  it.  And  when  he 
had    come,  he   found  on  it  only  leaves;    for   the 

14  time  of  figs  had  not  arrived.  (14)  And  he  said 
to  it:  Henceforth  and  for  ever,  let  no  man  eat 
fruit  from  thee :  and  the  disciples  heard  it.     And 

15  they  came  to  Jerusalem.  (15)  And  Jesus  entered 
the  temple  of  God :  and  he  began  to  cast  out  those 


MARK,    XL 


Sy. 


"  Gr.  Peter. 


Sy.  word. 


wlio  bought  and  sold  in  the  temple  ;  and  he  over- 
turned the  counters  of  the  money-brokers,  and  the 
seats   of  them   that   sold   doves.      (16)    And  he  16 
suffered  no  one  to  carry  goods  through  the  temple. 
(17)    And  he  taught  them,   and  said:    Is  it  not  17 
written,  My  house  shall  be  called  the  house  of 
prayer  for  all  nations?     But  ye  have  made  it  a 
den  of  robbers.     (18)  And  the  chief  priests  and  18 
the  Scribes  heard  [him],  and  they  sought  how  they 
might  destroy  him  ;  for  they  were  afraid  of  him, 
because  all  the   people   admired  his  doctrine.'' — 
(19)  And  when  it  was  evening,  they  went  out  from  1 9 
the  city.    (20)  And  in  the  morning,  as  they  passed  20 
by,  they  saw  the  fig-tree  dried  up,  as  it  were,  fi-om  its 
root.     (21)  And  Simoni^  remembered,  and  said  to  21 
him :    Kabbi ;    behold,    the    fig-tree    which    thou 
cursedst,  is  dried  up.    (22)  And  Jesus  replied,  and  22 
said  to  them :  Have  faith  in  God.     (23)  Verily  I  23 
say  to  you,  That  whoever  shall  say  to  this  moun- 
tain, Be  thou  removed,  and  fall  into  the  sea ;  and 
shall  not  doubt  in  his  heart,  but  shall  believe  that 
what  he  said  will  occur,  to  him  will  be  the  thing 
he   spoke.     (24)    Therefore   I   say   to   you,  That  24 
whatsoever  ye  shall  pray  and  ask  for,  believe  that 
it  will  be,  and  it  will  be  to  you.     (25)  And  when  25 
ye  stand  up  to  pray,  forgive  what  ye  have  against 
any  one ;  that  your  Father  who  is  in  heaven  may 
also  forgive  your  offences.     (2(3)  For  if  ye  forgive  26 
not,  your  Father  also  who  is  in  heaven  will  not 
forgive  you  your  offences. 

And  they  came  again  to  Jerusalem.     And  as  he  27 
was  walking  in  the  temple,  the  chief  priests  and 
Scribes  and  Elders  came  to  him,  (28)  and  said  to  28 
him  :  By  what  authority  doest  thou  these  things? 
And   who   gave   thee  the  authority  to   do    these 
things?    (29)  And  Jesus  said  to  them :  I  also  will  29 
ask  you  one  thing,^  that  ye  may  tell  me,  and  I  will 
tell  you  by  what  authority  I  do  these  things.    (30)  30 
The  baptism  of  John,  whence  was  it?  from  heaven, 
or  from  men?     Tell  me.     (31)  And  they  reasoned  31 
with  themselves,  and  said:   If  we  should  say  to 
him.  From  heaven  ;  he  will  say  to  us,  Why  then 
did  ye  not  believe  him?     (32)  But  if  we  should  32 
say.   From  men  ;    there  is  fear  from  the  people  ; 
for  the}'-  have  all  held  John  to  be  truly  a  prophet. 
(33)  And  they  answered,  and  said  to  Jesus  :   We  33 


MARK,    XII. 

do  not  know.     He  said  to  them  :  Neither  do  I  tell 
jou  bj  what  authority  I  do  these  things. 

XII.  And  he  began  to  discourse  with  them  in  simili- 
tudes. ^^  A  certain  man  planted  a  vineyard,  and 
inclosed  it  with  a  hedge,  and  dug  in  it  a  wine  vat, 
and  built  a  tower  in  it,  and  put  it  into  the  hands 

2  of  husbandmen,  and  removed  to  a  distance.  (2) 
And  at  tlie  proper  time,  he  sent  his  servant  to  the 
husbandmen,  to  receive  of  the  fruits  of  the  vine- 

3  yard.     (3)  And  they  beat  him,  and  sent  him  away 

4  empt3^  (4)  And  again  he  sent  to  them  another 
serv;int ;  and  him  also  they  stoned,  and  wounded, 

5  and  sent  him  away  under  indignities.  (5)  And 
again  he  sent  another ;  and  him  they  killed.  And 
he  sent  many  other  servants,  some  of  whom  they 

(3  beat,  and  some  they  killed.  (6)  At  last,  having  an 
only  and  dear  son,  he  sent  him  to  them  ;  for  he 

7  said,  Perhaps  they  will  respect  my  son.  (7)  But 
those  husbandmen  said  among  themselves  :  This  is 
the  heir ;  come,  let  us  kill  him,  and  the  inheritance 

8  will  be  ours.     (8)  And  they  took  him,  and  slew 

9  [him],  and  cast  [him]  out  of  the  vineyard.  (9) 
What  therefore  will  the  lord  of  the  vineyard  do? 
lie  will  come  and  destroy  those  husbandmen,  and 

10  transfer  the  vineyard  to  others.  (10)  And  have 
ye  not  read  this  scripture.  The  stone  which  the 
builders  rejected,    hath  become  the   head  of  the 

11  corner:  (11)  From  the  Lord,  was  this;   and  it  is 

12  wonderful  in  our  eyes? — (12)  And  they  sought  to 
apprehend  him,  but  were  afraid  of  the  people ; 
for  they  knew  that  he  spoke  this  similitude  against 
them.     And  they  left  him,  and  went  away. 

13  And  they  sent  to  him  some  of  the  Scribes  and 
of  the  household  of  Herod,  to  ensnare  him  in  dis- 

14  course.  (14)  And  these  came,  and  asked  him : 
Teacher;''  we  know  that  thou  art  veracious,  and 
hast  no  fear  of  man ;  for  thou  regardest  not  the 
ftice  of  men,  but  teachest  the  way  of  God  in  truth. 
Is  it  lawful  to  give  capitation  money  to  CjBsar;  or 

15  not?  Shall  we  give,  or  not  give?  (15)  And  he 
knew  their  wile,  and  said  to  them :  Why  tempt  ye 

16  me?  Bring  me  a  denarius,  that  I  may  see  it.  (16) 
And  they  brought  [one]  to  him.  And  he  said  to 
them:  Whose  is  this  image  and  inscription?    They 

17  said  to  him:  Caesar's.     (17)  Jesus  said  to  them: 


87 


*  or,  parables. 


Sy  ]l  g^\Vl 


88 


MARK,    XII. 


Sy.  ]l  g^\V> 


died,  and  left  no  seed, 
her,  and  died,  and  be 
third  in  like  manner, 
her,  and  left  no  seed. 


What  is  Ciesar's,  give  to  Cnesar  ;  and  what  is  God's, 
[give]  to  God.     And  they  wondered  at  him. — (18)  18 
Then  came  to  him  Saddacecs,  Avho  say  that  there 
is  no  resurrection;  and  they  asked  him,  and  said: 
(19)  Teacher  ;<=  Moses  wrote  to  us,  that  if  a  man's  19 
brother   die,  and   leave   a   widow,  but   leave   no 
children,  his  brother  shall  take  bis  widow,   and 
raise  up  seed  to  bis  brother.      (20)    There  were  20 
seven   brothers :    and  the   first  took   a  wife,   and 

(21)  And  the  second  took  21 
also  left  no  seed :  and  the 

(22)  And  the  seven  took  22 
Last  of  all,  the  woman  also 

died.     (23)  In  the  resurrection,  therefore,  of  which  23 
of  them  will  she  be  the  wife  ?     For  all  the  seven 
took  her.     (24)  Jesus  said  to  them:  Is  it  not  on  24 
this  account  that  ye  err,  because  ye  understand  not 
the  scriptures,  nor  the  power  oi'  God  ?     (25)  For  25 
when  they  rise  from  the  dead,  they  do  not  take 
wives,  nor  are  wives  given  to  husbands  ;  but  they 
are  as  the  angels  that  are  in  heaven.     (26)  But  26 
concerning  the  dead,  that  they  rise,  have  ye  not 
read  in  a  book  of  Moses,  how  God  said  to  him  from 
the  bush  :  I  am  the  God  of  Abraham,  and  the  God 
of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob  ?     (27)  lie  is  not  27 
the  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living.     Ye,  there- 
fore, do  err  greatly. — (28)  And  one  of  the  Scribes  28 
came,  and  beard  them  as  they  discussed,  and  he 
saw  that  be  gave  them  an  excellent  answer ;  and 
be  asked  him,    Which  is  the  first  of  all  the  com- 
mandments?    (29)  Jesus  said  to  him:    The  first  29 
of  all  the  commandments  [is] :  Hear,  O  Israel ;  the 
Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord :  (30)  and  thou  sbalt  30 
love  the  Lord  thy  God,  with  all  thy  heart,  and 
with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind,  and  with 
all  thy  might.     This  is  the  first  commandment, 
(31)  And  the  second,  which  is  like  it,  [is]  :  Thou  31 
sbalt  love  thy  neighbor,  as  thyself.     There  is  no 
other  coniinandment  greater  than  these.     (32)  The  32 
Scribe  said  to  bini :  Excellently!  Rabbi;  thou  bast 
spoken  the  truth  ;  for  be  is  one  [God],  and  there  is 
no  other  beside  him.     (33)  And  for  a  man  to  love  33 
him,  with  all  the  heart,  and  with  all  the  mind,  and 
with  all  the  soul,  and  with  all  the  might ;  and  to 
love  his  neighbor,  as  himself;  is  better  than  all 
holocausts  and  sacrifices.      (34)    And  Jesus   per-  34 


MARK,    XIII. 


89 


ou 


ceived  that  he  replied  wisely;  and  he  answered, 
and  said  to  him :  Thou  art  not  far  from  the  king- 
dom of  God. — And  no  one  dared  again  to  question 
him. 

And  as  Jesus  was  teaching  in  the  temple,  he 
answered  and  said :  How  can  the  Scribes  say,  that 
oG  Messiah  is  the  son  of  David?  (36)  For  "'David 
himself  saith,  by  the  Holy  Spirit :  The  Lord  said 
to  my  Lord ;  Seat  thyself  on  my  right  hand,  until 
I  place  thv  enemies  as  a  footstool  beneath  thy  feet. 

37  (37)  David  therefore  calleth  him  "  My  Lord  ;"  and 
how  is  he  his  son  ?     And  all  the  multitude  heard 

38  him  with  pleasure.  (38)  And  he  said  to  them  in 
his  teaching  -A  Beware  of  the  Scribes,  who  choose 
to  walk  in  long  robes,  and  love  the  salutation  in 

39  the  streets,  (39)  and  the  chief  seats  in  the  syua- 

40  gogues,  and  the  chief  couches  at  feasts.  (40)  They 
devour  the  houses  of  widows,  under  pretence  that 
they  prolong  their  prayers.     These  shall  receive  a 

41  greater  condemnation. — (41)  And  as  Jesus  sat 
over  against  the  treasury-room,  he  saw  how  the 
multitude  east    money    into    the   treasury.      And 

42  many  rich  ones  cast  in  much.  (42)  And  a  poor 
Avidow  came,  and  cast  in  two  mites,  which  are  a 

43  brass  farthing.*-'     (43)  And  Jesus  called  his  disci 
pies,  and  said  to  them :  Verily  I  say  to  you.  That 
this  poor  widow  hatli  cast  into  the  treasury  more 

44  than  all  they  that  cast  in.  (44)  For  they  all  cast 
in  of  that  which  abounded  to  them,  but  she,  of  her 
poverty,  hath  cast  in  all  that  she  possessed,  the 
whole  of  her  property. 

XIII.  And  as  Jesus  retired  from  the  temple,  one  of 
his  disciples  said  to  him:  Teacher ;*   behold;    see 

2  these  stones,  and  these  structures  1  (2)  And  Jesus 
said  to  him:  Admirest  thou  these  groat  structures? 
There  will  not  be  left  here  one  stone  upon  another, 

3  not  demolished.  (3)  And  as  Jesus  was  sitting  on 
the  mount  of  Olives,  over  against  the  temple,  Ce- 
phasb  and  James  and  John  and  Andrew  asked  him, 

4  privately:  (4)  Tell  us,  wlien  will  these  things  be? 
and  what  [will  be]  the  sign  that  these  tilings  ap- 

5  proach  their  consummation?  (5)  And  Jesus  be- 
gan to  say  to  them :  Beware,  that  no  one  mislead 

6  you:  (6)  for  many  will  come  in  my  name,  and  will 
say :    I  am  he.   ""  And    they  will  mislead   many. 


■»  Sy. 
aT_l-2u 


n  «>-. 


Sy.  "jjolnj 


Sy.  ]i  g^Nv> 


^  Gr.  Peler. 


90 


MARK,    XIII. 


"  or,  gospel. 


(7)  But  when  ye  shall  liear  of  battles,   and  the     7 
rumor  of  battles,  be  not  afraid ;  for  this  must  be ; 
but  the  end  is  not  yet.     (8)  For  nation  will  rise     8 
against  nation,  and  kingdom  against  kingdom,  and 
there  will  be  earthquakes  in  several  places,  and  there 
will  be  famines  and  insurrections.     These  are  the 
beginning  of  sorrows. — (9)  And  take  heed  to  your-     9 
selves;  for  they  will  deliver  you  np  to  the  tribunals; 
and  ye  will  be  beaten  in  the  synagogues,  and  ye 
will  stand  before  kings  and  governors,  on  my  ac- 
count, for  a  testimony  to  them.     (10)  And  my  10 
tidings^  must  first  be  proclaimed  among  all  tlic 
nations.     (11)  And  when  they  shall  lead  you  to  11 
deliver  you  up,  be  not  solicitous  beforehand  what 
ye  shall  say,  neither  premeditate ;  but,  that  which 
shall  be  given  you  in  that  hour,  speak  ye;  for  it  is 
not  ye  that  speak,  but  the  Holy  Spirit.     (12)  And  12 
brotiier  will  deliver  up  his  brother  to  death,  and 
the  father  his  son  ;  and  children  Avill  rise  up  against 
their  parents,  and  will  kill  them.     (13)  And  ye  13 
will  be  hated  of  every  man,  on  account  of  my 
name.     But  whoever  shall  persevere  to  the  end, 
shall  live. — (14)   And  when  ye  see  the  profane  14 
sign  of  desolation,  which  was  mentioned  by  Daniel 
the  prophet,  standing  where  it  ought  not; — (let  him 
that  readctli,  understand ;)  then  let  those  that  are 
in  Judtea,  flee  to  the  mountain:  (15)  and  let  him  15 
that  is  on  the  roof,  not  come  down  and  enter  [it], 
to  take  any  thing  from  his  house:  (16)  and  let  him  16 
that  is  in  the  field,  not  return  back  to  take   his 
clothing.    (17)  But,  woe  to  those  with  child,  and  to  17 
those  who  nurse  children,  in  those  days!    (18)  And  18 
pray  ye,  that  your  flight  be  not  in  winter.    (19)  For  19 
in  those  days  will  be  affliction,  such  as  hath  not 
been  from  the  beginning  of  the  creation  that  God 
made  until  now,  and  shall  not  be.   (20)  And,  unless  20 
God  should  shorten  those  days,  no  flesh  would  live. 
But,  on  account  of  the  elect  whom  he  hath  chosen, 
he  hath  shortened  those  days. — (21)  Then,  if  any  21 
one  shall  say  to  you:  Lo,  here  is  Messiah,  or  lo, 
there  ;  give  not  credence.     (22)  For  false  Messiahs  22 
will  arise,  and  lying  prophets ;  and  they  will  give 
signs  and  wonders;  and  will  deceive,  if  possible, 
even  the  elect.     (23)  Bat  take  ye  heed.     Lo,   I  23 
have  told  you  the  whole  beforehand. — (24)  And  in  24 
those  days,  after  that  alfliction,  the  sun  will  be 


MARK,    XIV. 


91 


darkened ;  and  the  moon  will  not  give  her  light ; 

25  (25)  and  the  stars  will  fall  from  heaven ;   and  the 

26  powers  of  heaven  will  be  shaken.  (26)  And  then 
Vkdll  they  see  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  the  clouds, 

27  with  great  power  and  glory.  (27)  And  then  will 
he  send  forth  his  angels,  and  will  assemble  his  elect 
from  the  four  Avinds,  from  the  extremity  of  earth 

28  to  the  extremity  of  heaven. — (28)  And,  from  the 
fig-tree,  learn  ye  a  simile.'^  AVhen  its  twigs  are 
tender,   and  its  leaves  bud  forth,   ye  know  that 

29  summer  approacheth.  (29)  So  also,  when  ye  shall 
see  these  occurrences,  know  ye,  that  it  is  near,  at 

30  the  door.  (30)  A^erily  I  say  to  you,  That  this 
generation^  shall  not  pass  away,   until   all  these 

31  things  occur.     (31)   Heaven  and  earth  will   pass 

32  away,  but  my  words  will  not  pass  away. — (32)  But 
of  that  day  and  that  hour,  knoweth  no  man ;  nor 
the  angels  of  heaven ;    neither  the  Son,  but  the 

33  Father.     (33)  Take  heed,  watch,  and  pray;  for  ye 
31:  know  not  when  the  time  is.     (34)  For  it  is  as  a 

man,  who  took  a  journey,  and  left  his  home;  and 
he  gave  authority  to  his  servants,  and  to  each  his 
service ;    and    he   commande<l    the   porter   to    be 

35  watchful.  (35)  Watch  ye,  therefore ;  for  je  know 
not  when  the  lord  of  the  house  cometh ;  at  even- 
ing, or  at  midnight,  or  at  the  cock-crowing,  or  in 

36  the  morning:  (36)  lest  he  come  suddenly,  and  find 

37  you  sleeping.  (37)  And  what  I  say  to  you,  I  say 
to  you  all :  Be  ye  watchful. 

XIV.  And  after  two  days,  was  the  passover  of  un- 
leavened cakes.  And  the  chief  priests  and  the 
Scribes  sought  how  they  might  take  him  by  strata- 

2  gem,  and  kill  him.  (2)  But  they  said:  Not  on 
the  festival,  lest  there  be  commotion  among  the 

3  people. — (3)  And  when  he  was  at  Bethany  in  the 
house  of  Simon  the  leper,  as  he  reclined,  a  woman 
came  having  an  alabaster  box  of  precious  ointment 
of  spikenard,  of  great  price ;  and  she  opened  and 

■i  poured  upon  the  head  of  Jesus.  (4)  And  there 
were  certain  of  the  disciples,  who  were  dissatisfied 
among  themselves,  and  said:    Why  was  this  waste 

5  of  the  ointment?  (5)  For  it  might  have  been  sold 
for  more  than  three  hundred  denarii,  and  been 
given  to  the  poor.     And  they  were  indignant  at 

6  her.     (6)   But* Jesus   said:    Let   her   alone;    why 


or,  allegory. 


Sy.  1A.OJ 


92 


MARK,    XIV. 


*  Sy.  ^l-^t^ 

'  Sy.  "ikiX:. 


trouble  ye  her?     Slie  hath  done  an  excellent  act 
towards  me.     (7)  For  the  poor  ye  have  ahvaj's     7 
with  you ;  and  when  ye  please,  ye  can  do  them 
kind   offices :    but    I   am   not   always   with   you. 
(8)  What  was  in  her  power,  she  hath  done ;  and     8 
by  anticipation,  hath  perfumed  my  body,  as  if  for 
burial.     (9)  Verily  I  say  to  you,  That  wherever     9 
tliis  my  gospeh   shall   be  proclaimed,   in  all   the 
world, '^  this  also  which  she  hath  done  shall  be  told, 
in  memory  of  her. — (10)  And  Judas  Iscariot,  one  10 
of  tluj  twelve,  went  to  the  chief  priests,  in  order  to 
betray  Jesus  to  them.     (11)  And  when  they  heard  11 
[him],  they  rejoiced;  and  they  promised  to  give 
him  money.     And  he  sought  for  opportunity  to 
betray  him. 

And  on  the  first  day  of  unleavened  cakes,  on  12 
which   the  Jews  slay  the   passover,   his  disciples 
said   to   him:   Where  wilt  thou  that  we  go,   and 
prepare  for  thee  to  eat  the  passover?     (18)  And  13 
he  sent  two  of  his  disciples,  and  said  to  them:   Go 
ye  to  the  city,  and  behold,  there  will  meet  you  a 
man  bearing  a  pitcher  of  water.     Go  ye  after  him, 
(14)  and  where  he  entereth  in,  say  ye  to  the  lord  of  14 
the  house:  Our  Kabbi  saith.  Where  is  the  place  of 
refreshment,  in  which  I  may  eat  the  passover  with 
my  disciples?     (15)  And  lo,  he  will  show  you  a  15 
large  ujjper  room,  furnished  and  prepared :   there 
make  ready  for  us.     (16)  And  his  disciples  went,   16 
and  entered  the  city,  and  found  a's  he  had  tohl 
them :  and  they  made  ready  the  passover.    (17)  And  17 
when   it  was   evening,  he  came  with  his  twelve. 
(18)  And  as  they  reclined  and  ate,  Jesus  said :  18 
Verily  I  say  to  you,  That  one  of  3'ou  that  eateth 
with  me,  will  betray  me.     (19)  And  they  began   19 
to  be  distressed.     And  they  said  to  him,  one  by 
one.  Is  it  I?     (20)  And  he  said  to  them:    It  is  20 
one  of  the  twelve  that  dippeth  with   me  in   the 
dish.     (21)  And  the  Son  of  man  goeth,   as  it  is  21 
written  of  him :  but  woe  to  that  man,  by  whom  the 
Son  of  man  is  betrayed.     Better  would   it   have 
been   for  that  man,  if   he  had  not   been   born. — 
(22^  And  as  they  were  eating,  Jesus  took  bread,  22 
and  blessed,  and  brake,  and  gave  to  them,  and  said 
to  them  :  Take  ;  this  is  my  body.     (23)  And   he  23 
took  the  cup,  and  gave  thanks,  and   bless(Ml,  and 
gave  to  them.    And  they  all  drank  oi'  it.    (24)  And  24 


MARK,    XIV. 


93 


lie  said  to  them :    This  is  my  blood  of  the  new 
testament,  c    which    is   shed    in   behalf  of  many. 

25  (25)  Veriiy  I  say  to  you,  That  I  will  not  drink 
again  of  the  product  of  the  vine,  until  the  day  in 
which  I  shall  drink  it  anew  in  the  kingdom  of 
God. 

26  And   they  sang  pi-aise,   and  went   out   to  the 

27  mount  of  Olives.  (27)  And  Jesus  said  to  them: 
All  of  you  will  this  night  be  stumbled  in  me  :  for 
it  is  written,  "  I  will  smite  the  shepherd,  and  his 

28  sheep  will  be  scattered."     (28)  And  when  I  am 

29  risen,  I  will  precede  you  into  Galilee.  (29)  And 
Cephas*^  said  to  him :  Though  they  all  should  be 

30  stumbled,  3'et  I  will  not  be.  (30)  Jesus  said  to 
him :  Yerily  I  say  to  thee.  That  this  day,  on  this 
night,  before  the  cock  shall  crow  twice,  thou  wilt 

31  thrice  deny  me.  (31)  And  he  said,  in  addition : 
If  I  were  to  die  with  thee,  I  will  not  deny  thee, 
my  Lord.     And  like  him,  spake  all  the  disciples. 

32  — (32)  And  they  came  to  the  place  called  Geth- 
semane;^  and  he  said  to  his  disciples.  Sit  ye  here, 

33  while  I  pray.  (33)  And  he  took  with  him  Cephas 
and  James  and  John,  and  began  to  be  gloomy  and 

34:  distressed.  (34)  And  he  said  to  them:  My  soul 
hath  anguish,  even  to  death.     ^Yait  for  me  here, 

35  and  be  watchful.  (35)  And  he  advanced  a  little, 
and  fell  upon  the  ground,  and  prayed  that,  if  it 
were  possible,   the   hour   might   pass   from   him. 

36  (36)  And  he  said :  Father,  my  Father,  thou  canst 
do  all  things.     Let  this  cup  pass  from  me.     Yet 

37  not  my  pleasure,  but  thine.  (37)  And  he  came 
and  found  them  sleeping.  And  he  said  to  Cephas : 
Sleepest  thou,  Simon?     Couldst  thou  not  watch 

38  with  me  one  hour?  (38)  Watch  and  pray,  lest  ye 
enter  into  temptation.     The  spirit^  is  willing  and 

39  ready,  but  the  bodys  is  weak.  (39)  And  he  went 
again  and  prayed,   speaking  the  same  language. 

40  (40)  And  returning  he  came  again  and  found  them 
sleeping,  for  their  eyes  were  heav}^     And  they 

41  knew  not  what  to  say  to  him.  (41)  And  he  came 
the  third  time,  and  said  to  them:  Sleep  on  now, 
and  take  rest.  The  end  is  near ;  the  hour  is  come ; 
and  lo,  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  into  the  hands 

42  of  sinners.     (42)  Arise  ye ;  let  us  go.     Lo,  he  that 

43  betrayeth  me  is  at  hand.  (43)  And  while  he  was 
yet  speaking,  Judas  Iscariot,  one  of  the  twelve, 


Sy.  "toA^j 


^  Gr.  Peter. 


Sy.,_LQ£Dj-^ 


f  Sy.  "jjsjOJ 

e  Sy.  V^^ 


94 


MARK,    XIV. 


Sy.  l^ljuD 


'  Gr.  Peter. 


arrived,  and  much  people,  with  swords  and  clubs, 
from  before  the  chief  priests  and  Scribes  and  Elders. 

(44)  And  the  traitor  who  betrayed  [him],  had  given  44 
them  a  sign,  and  said:  He  whom  I  shall  kiss  is 
the  man.     Seize  promptly,  and  lead  him  away. 

(45)  And  immediately  he  came  up,  and  said  to  45 
him:    Rabbi,  Rabbi;  and  kissed  him.     (46)  And  46 
they  laid  hands  on  him  and  took  him.     (47)  x\hd  47 
one  of  them  that  stood  by,  drew  a  sword,  and 
smote  a  servant  of  the  high  priest,  and  cut  off  his 
ear.     (48)  And  Jesus  answered  and  said  to  them:  48 
llave  ye  come  out  against  me,  as  against  a  robber, 
with  swords  and  clubs,  to  apprehend  me?     (49)  I  49 
was  daily  with  you,  while  I  taught  in  the  temple, 
and  ye  seized  me  not.     But  this  occurs,  that  the 
scriptures  may  be  fulfilled.     (50)  Then  his  disciples  50 
left  him  and  fled.     (51)  And  a  3'oung  man  fol-  51 
lowed  after  him,  who  was  clad  with  a  linen  cloth 
on  [his]  naked  [body]  :  and  they  laid  hold  of  him. 
(52)  And  he  left  the  linen  cloth,  and  fled  naked.      52 

And  they  led  away  Jesus  to  Caiaphas'i  the  high  53 
priest.      And  with   him  were  assembled  all   the 
chief   priests   and   the    Scribes   and   the   Elders. 

(54)  And  Simon'  followed  after  him,  at  a  distance,  54 
into  the  hall  of  the  high  priest;  and  he  sat  with 
the   servants,   and  warmed   himself  by   the  fire. 

(55)  And  the  chief  priests  and  all  the  assembly  bb 
sought  for  testimony  against  Jesus,  to  put  him  to 
death:   but  they  found  it  not,     {bQ)   For  while  56 
many  testified  against  him,  their  testimonies  were 

i  inadequate. '^     (57)  And  some  false  witnesses  stood  57 
up  against  him,  and  said :  (58)  We  have  heard  him  58 
say:  I  will  destroy  this  temple,  which  is  made 
with  hands ;  and  in  three  days  I  will  build  another, 
not  made  with  hands:     (59)  Nor  even  thus  were  59 
their  testimonies   adequate.     (60)  And   the  high  60 
priest  arose  in  the  midst,  and  interrogated  Jesus, 
and  said:  Returnest  thou  no  answer?     What  do 
these  testify  against  thee?     (61)  And  Jesus  was  61 
silent,  and  made  no  reply.     And  again  the  chief 
priest  interrogated  him,  and  said :  Art  thou  the    • 
Messiah,  the  Son  of  the  Blessed  ?     (62)  And  Jesus  62 
said  to  him :    I  am.     And  ye  will  see  the  Son  of 
man  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  power,  and  he 
'  or,  Ih  skirl,    I  will  come  on  the  clouds  of  heaven.     (63)  And  the  63 
CTlLjIod     :high  priest  rent  his  tuidc,i  and  said:  What  need 


Sy.^CL*  ]J 
=  not  equal. 


MARK,    XV. 


95 


64  of  witnesses  have  we,  any  more?  (64)  Behold, 
from  his  own  mouth  ye  have  heard  blasphemy. 
How  doth  it  appear  to  you?     And  they  all  deci- 

65  ded,  that  he  deserved  to  die.  (65)  And  some  be- 
gan to  spit  in  his  face,  and  to  buffet  him,  saying : 
Prophesy  thou.     And  the  servants  smote  him  on 

66  the  cheeks. — (66)  And  as  Simon"*  was  below  in  the 

67  court,  a  maid  of  the  high  priest  came,  (67)  and  saw 
him  warming  himself;  and  she  looked  upon  him, 
and  said  to  him :  And  thou  too  wast  with  Jesus 

68  the  Nazarean.  (68)  But  he  denied,  and  said:  I 
know  not  what  thou  sayest.     And  he  went  out 

69  into  the  porch ;  and  the  cock  crew.  (69)  And 
the  maid  saw  him  again,  and  she  began  to  say  to 
those  standing  by.  This  man  also  is  one  of  them. 

70  (70)  And  he  again  denied  [it].  And  a  little  after, 
those  standing  there  said  again  to  Cephas:  Surely, 
thou  art   one  of  them ;    for  thou  art  likewise  a 

71  Galilean,  and  thy  speech  answers  to  it.  (71)  And 
he  began  to  imprecate,  and  swore:  I  know  not 

72  that  man,  of  whom  ye  speak.  (72)  And  immedi- 
ately the  cock  crew  the  second  time.  And  Simon 
remembered  the  declaration  of  Jesus,  who  said  to 
him :  Before  the  cock  shall  crow  twice,  thou  wilt 
thrice  deny  me.     And  he  began  to  weep. 

XV.  And  forthwith,  in  the  morning,  the  chief  priests 
with  the  Elders  and  the  Scribes,  and  the  whole 
SanlLedrim,^'  held  a  consultation.  And  they  bound 
Jesus,  and  led  him  away,  and  delivered  him  over 

2  to  Pilate  the  president.''  (2)  And  Pilate  asked 
him  :  Art  thou  the  king  of  the  Jews  ?     lie  replied 

8  and  said  to  him :  Thou  hast  said.     (3)  And  the 

4  chief  priests  accused  him  of  many  things.  (4)  And 
Pilate  again  questioned  him,  and  said  to  him : 
Makest  thou   no   reply?      See   how   much   they 

5  testify    against    thee!      (5)    But  Jesus   gave    no 

6  answer ;  so  that  Pilate  wondered.  (6)  And  it  was 
his  custom,  at  each  festival,  to  release  to  them  one 

7  prisoner,  whom  they  might  desire.  (7)  And  there 
was  one  named  Bar  Abas,<=  who  was  confined  with 
the  movers  of  sedition,  who  had  committed  murder 

8  in  the  insurrection.  (8)  And  the  people  clamored, 
and  began  to  demand,  that  he  should  do  to  them  as 

9  he  was  accustomed.  (9)  And  Pilate  answered,  and 
said :  Will  ye,  that  I  release  to  you  the  king  of  the 


™  Gr.  Peter. 


bSy. 


.01 


Sy.  H  r^ 


96 


MARK,    XV. 


«  Sy.  n^col, 


|.iJ_i5QJD 


e  Sv, 


■^^ 


•■  i.  e.  9  A.  M. 


Jews  ?    (10)  For  Pilate  knew  that  the  chief  priests,  10 
from  envy,  had  deUvered  him  up.     (11)  But  the  11 
chief  priests  farther  persuaded  the  multitudes,  that 
Bar  Abas  should  be  released  to  them.     (12)  And  12 
Pilate  said  to  them  :  AVhat  will  ye,  therefore,  that 
I  do  to  him  whom  ye  call  king  of  the  Jews? 

(13)  And   they   again   cried   out:     Crucify   him.  13 

(14)  And  Pilate  said  to  them  :  But  what  evil  hath  14 
he  done?     And  they  cried  out  the  more:  Crucify 
him.     (15)  And  Pilate  was  willing  to  gratify  the  15 
wishes  of  the  multitudes  ;  and  he  released  to  them 
Bar  Abas ;  and,  having  scourged  Jesus,  he  delivered 
him  to  them  to  be  crucified. — (16)  And  the  soldiers  16 
led  him  into  the  hall  which  was  the  Prietorium  ;d 
and   they  called   together  the  whole    regiment  ;e 
(17)  and  they  clothed  him  in  purple,  and  braided  a  17 
crown  of  thorns  and  put  upon  him ;  (18)  and  began  18 
to  salute  him  with,   "  Hail,  king  of  the  Jews !" 
(19)  And  they  smote  him  on  the  head  with  a  reed,  19 
and  spit  in  his  face,  and  bowed  upon  their  knees 
and  worshipped  him.     (20)  And  having  mocked  20 
him,  they  divested  him  of  the  purple,  and  clothed 
him  in  his  own  garments,  and  led  him  forth  to 
crucify  him. 

And   they   compelled  a  passer-by,    Simon    the  21 
Cyrenian,^  the  father  of  Alexander  and  Kufus,  who 
was    coming    from  the  fields,  to  bear  his   cross. 
(22)    And   they   brought  him  to  Golgotha,?  the  22 
place   which   is  interpreted  a  Skull,      (23)    And  23 
they  gave  him  to  drink  wine  in  which  myrrh  was 
mixed;  and  he  would  not  receive  it.      (24)  And  24 
when  they  had   crucified    him,   they  divided  his 
garments ;  and  cast  the  lot  upon  them,  what  each 
should  take.      (25)    And  it  was  the  third  hour^  25 
when  they  crucified  him.     (26)  And  the  cause  of  26 
his   death   was  written  in  the   inscription :    This 

(27)  And  they  cru-  27 


IS  THE   KING  OF  THE   JeWS. 

cified  with  him  two  robbers,  the  one  on  his  right 

hand,  and  the  other  on  his  left.      (28)  And  the 

scripture  was  fallilled  which 

counted  among  the  wicked. 

that  passed  by,  reviled  him; 

heads,  they  said:    Aha,  thou  that  destroyest  the 

temple  and  buildest  it  in  three  days,  (30)  rescue 

thyself,  and  come  down  from  the  cross.     (31)  And 

so  also  the  chief  priests,  jeering  one  with  another, 


28 
saith:    He  was   ac- 
(29)  And  they  also  29 
and,  nodding  their 

30 
31 


MARK,    XVI. 


97 


and  the  Scribes,  said:  He  gave  life  to  others,  liis 

32  own  life  lie  cannot  save.  (32)  Let  Messiah,  the 
king  of  the  Jews,  now  descend  from  the  cross,  that 
we  may  see  [it]  and  believe  in  him.  And  those 
also  who  were  cruciified  with  him,  derided  him. — 

33  (33)  And  when  the  sixth  houpi  was  come,  there 
was  darkness  over  all    the    land  until  the  ninth 

3i  liour.k  (34-)  And  at  the  ninth  hour,  Jesus  cried 
with  a  loud  voice,  and  said :  II,  II,  lemono  sliebak- 
thone  ;i    that   is :    My    God,  my  God ;    why  hast 

35  thou  forsaken  me  ?  (35)  And  some  of  them  that 
stood  by,  when  they  heard  it,  said :    He   calleth 

36  for  Elijah.  (36)  And  one  ran  and  filled  a  sponge 
with  vinegar,  and  tied  it  on  a  reed,  to  offer  him 
drink.      And  they    said:    Desist;    let  us   see  if 

37  Elijah  will  come  to  take  him  down. — (37)  And 
Jesus    cried    with   a   loud   voice,    and   expired.™ 

38  (38)  And  the  curtain  of  the  door  of  the  temple  was 

39  rent,  from  the  top  to  the  bottom.  (39)  And  when 
the  centurion,  who  was  standing  near  him,  saw 
that  he  so  cried  and  expired,  he  said :  Verily,  this 

40  was  the  Son  of  God. — (40)  And  there  were  women 
looking  on,  from  a  distance,  iSlary  Magdalcna,  and 
Mary  the  mother  of  James  the  less  and  of  Joses, 

41  and  Salome ;  (41)  who,  when  he  was  in  Galilee 
adhered  to  him,  and  ministered  to  him ;  and  man}^ 
other  women,  who  had  come  up  with  him  to 
Jerusalem. 

42  And,  as  it  was  the  eve  of  preparation,  which 

43  precedeth  the  sabbath,  (43)  Joseph  of  Kamath,  an 
honorable  counsellor,"  who  also  himself  waited  for 
the  kingdom  of  God,  came,  and  assuming  courage, 
went  to  Pilate,   and   begged  the  body  of  Jesus. 

44  (44)  And  Pilate  wondered  that  he  should  be 
already  dead.      And  he  called  the  centurion,  and 

45  inquired  if  he  had  been  any  time  dead.  (45)  And 
when  he  learned  it,  he  gave  his  body  to  Joseph. 

46  (46)  And  Joseph  bought  fine  linen,  and  took  it 
down,  and  wrapped  it  in  the  linen,  and  deposited 
it  in  a  sepulchre  that  was  hewed  in  a  rock,  and 
rolled  a  stone  against  the  door  of  the  sepulchre. 

47  (47)  And  Mary  Magdalena  and  Mary  [the  mother] 
of  Joses  saw  where  he  was  laid. 

XVI.  And  when  the  sabbath  had  passed,  Mary 
Magdalena,  and  Mary  [the  mother]  of  James,  and 


'  or,  noon. 
■^  or,  3  p.  M. 

'  Sy. 

■"  Sy.  So\>n 


Sy. 
Gr. 


98 


MARK,    XVI. 


Sv. 

u 


or,  gospel. 
Sy. 


Salome,  bought  aromatics,  that  tliey  might  come 
and  anoiut  him.     (2)  And  in  the  morning  of  the     2 
first  day  of  the  week,  they  came  to  the  sepulchre 
as  the  sun  arose.     (3)  And  they  said  among  them-     3 
selves :  Who  will  roll  back  for  us  the  stone  from 
the  door  of  the  sepulchre  ?     (4)  And  they  looked,     4 
and  saw  that  the  stone  was  rolled  away;    for  it 
was  very  great.     (5)  And  entering  the  sepulchre,     5 
they  saw  a  youth  sitting  on  the  right  hand,  and 
clothed  in  a  white  robe :  and  they  were  in  pertur- 
bation.    (0)  But  he  said  to  them :   Be  not  affright-     6 
ed.     Ye  are  seeking  Jesus  the  Nazarean,  who  was 
crucified.     He  is  risen ;  he  is  not  here.     Behold, 
the  place  where  he  was  laid.     (7)  But  go,  tell  his     7 
disciples  and  Cephas :  Lo,  he  precedeth  you  into 
Galilee ;  there  will  ye  see  him,  as  he  said  "to  you, 
(8)  And  when  they  heard,  they  fled  and  left  the     8 
sepulchre ;    for   astonishment  and  trembling  had 
seized  them;    and  they  said  nothing  to  any  one, 
for  they  were  in  fear. — (9)  And  in  the  morning     9 
of  the  first  day  of  the  week,  he  arose ;   and  he 
appeared  first  to  Mary  Magdalena,  from  whom  he 
had  cast  out  seven  demons.     (10)  And  she  went  10 
and  told  them  that  had  been  with  him,  while  they 
were  mourning   and   weeping.      (11)    And   they,  11 
when  they  heard  [the  women]  say  that  he  was 
alive,  and  that  he  had  appeared  to  them, — did  not 
believe  them.     (12)  After  this  he  appeared,  under  12 
another  aspect,  ^^  to  two  of  them  as  they  walked 
and  went  into  the  country.     (13)  And  these  went  13 
and  told  the  rest ;    but  they  would  not  beheve 
them.     (14)  And  at  last,  he  appeared  to  the  eleven  14 
as  they  reclined  at  table ;    and  he  reproved  the 
slenderness  of  their  faith,  and  the  hardness  of  their 
heart;   because  they  believed  not  those  who  had 
seen   him   actually  risen.     (15)  And  he   said   to  15 
them :  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  proclaim  my 
tidings^   in   the   whole   creation.      (16)    lie   that  16 
believeth,  and  is  baptized,  liveth^ ;    but  he  that 
believeth   not,    is   condemned. ^     (17)   And  these  17 
signs  shall  attend  them  that  believe  :  In  my  name, 
they  will  cast  out  demons;    and  in  new  tongues 
will   they   speak.     (18)  And  they   will  take   up  18 
serpents;     and  if   they   should    drink   a   deadly 
poison,  it  will  not  harm  them ;  and  they  will  lay 
their  hands  on  the  sick,  and  they  will  be  healed. — 


LUKE,    I. 


99 


19  (19)  And  Jesus,  our  Lord,  after  he  had  conversed 
A\'ith  them,  ascended  to  heaven,   and  sat  on  the 

20  right  hand  of  God.— (20)  And  thej  went  forth, 
and  preached  everywhere:  and  our  Lord  aided 
them,  and  confirmed  their  discoui'ses  by  the  signs 
which  they  wrought. 


Completion  of  the  Holy  Gospel,'-  the  announcement  of  Marie ; 
tchich  he  uttered  and  proclaimed  in  Latin^  at  Rome. 


Sy 
■Sy. 


P-^\^C)1 


0015 


^£i£DO     ^^idDj      ]j;nmLD     »QCQ_Oa2l5     1-J^^     ift-ipO     ^n  .  \        in] 


V:" 


I'  lAr^J   "i-.?,  1  ro'^N'i^   Aj]jq_. 


The  Holy  Gospel,  the  Animnciatioii  of  Luke  the  Evangelist ; 

which  he  uttered  and  preached,  in  Greek,  at  Great  Alexandria. 


I.  Since  many  have  been  disposed  to  ^vrite  narra- 
tives of  those  events,  of  whicii  we  have  full  assur- 

2  ance,  (2)  as  they  delivered  them  to  us,  who  from 
the  lirst  were  eye-witnesses  and  ministers  of  the 

3  word ;  (3)  it  seemed  proper  for  me  also,  as  I  had 
examined  them  all  accurately,  to  write  out  the 
whole,  methodically,  for  thee,  excellent^  Theoph- 

4  ilus :  (4)  that  thou  maj'est  know  the  truth  of  the 
statements,''  which  thou  hast  been  taught. 

5  In  the  daj's  of  Herod  the  king  of  Judix^a,  there 
was  a  certain  priest,  whose  name  was  Zachariah,^ 
of  the  ministration^  of  the  house  of  Abijah;«^  and 
his  wife  was  of  the  daughters  of  Aaron,  and  her 

6  name  was  Elisabeth/  (6)  And  they  were  both 
upright  before  God,  and  walked  in  all  his  com- 
mandments, and  in  the  righteousness  of  the  Lord, 

7  without  reproach.  (7)  But  they  had  no  child,  be- 
cause Elisabeth  was  barren :  and  they  were  both 

8  advanced  in  life.s — (8)  And  it  occurred,  that  as  he 
performed  the  priestly  functions''  in  the  order  of 

9  his  ministration  before  the  Lord,  (9)  according  to 
the  usage  of  the  priesthood,  it  feU  to  him  to  offer 


•  Sy.  "Uk^ 

^  Sy.  words. 

<=  Sy.  ]^-^] 

]Lftl£L»l 
«  Sy.  ImJd] 

s  Sy.  7nanij  in 
their  days. 

*>  Sy.  acted 
priest. 


100 


LUKE,    I. 


Sv. 


^_J_K.Q_. 


^  Sy.  in  her 
days. 

>  Sy. 


Sy.  nodded  to 
nod. 


16 


the  incense.     And  be  went  into  tlie  temple  of  the 
Lord,  (10)  and  the  whole  multitude  of  the  people  10 
were   praying   without,   at   the   time   of   incense, 
(11)    And   the   angel   of    the  Lord   appeared   to  11 
Zachariah,  standing  on  the  right  side  of  the  altar 
of  incense.     (12)  And  when  Zachariah  saw  him,  12 
he  was  agitated,  and  fear  fell  upon  him.     (13)  And  13 
the  angel  said  to  him :  Fear  not,  Zachariah ;  for 
thy  praj'er  is  heard,  and  thy  wife  Elisabeth  will 
bear  thee  a  son,  and  thou  shalt  call  liis  name  John.' 
(14)  And  thou  wilt  have  joy  and  gladness:  and  11: 
many  will  rejoice  at  his  birtli.     (15)  For  he  will  be  15 
great  before  the  Lord ;  and  he  will  not  drink  wine 
nor  strong  drink,  and  will  be  filled  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  even  from  his  mother's  womb.     (16)  And 
man}^  of  the  children  of  Israel  will  he  convert  to 
the  Lord  their  God.     (17)  And  he  will  go  before  17 
him,  in  the  spirit  and  j)Ower  of  Elijah  the  prophet  j 
and  will  turn  the  heart  of  the  fathers  unto  tho 
children,   and  them   that   are  disobedient  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  righteous,  and  will  prepare  a 
perfect  people  for  the  Lord.     (18)  And  Zachariah  18 
said  to  the  angel :  How  shall  I  know  this  ?     For  I 
am  old,  and  my  wife  is  advanced  in  life.''   (19)  The  19 
angel  answered,  and  said  to  him:  I  am  Gabriel,' 
who  stand  before  God;  and  I  am  sent  to  converse 
with  thee,  and  to  tell  thee  these  things,   (20)  Hence-  20 
forth  thou  wilt  be  dumb,  and  unable  to  speak,  un- 
til the  day  when  these  things  take  place :  because 
thou  believedst  not  my  words,  which  vail  be  ful- 
filled in  their  time. — (21)  And  the  people  were 
standing   and   waiting  for   Zachariah;    and  they 
wondered  at  his  tarrying  so  long  iu  tlie  temple. 

(22)  And  when  Zachariah  came  forth,  he  could 
not  speak  with  them :  and  they  understood  that 
he  had  seen  a  vision  in  the  temple :  and  he  made 
many  signs'"  to  them,  and  remained  speechless. 

(23)  And  when  the  days  of  his  ministration  were  23 
accomplished,  he  came  to  his  house. — (2-i-)  And  it  24 
was  after  those  days,  that  Elisabeth  his  wife  con- 
ceived. And  she  secluded  herself  five  months; 
and  she  said :  (25)  These  things  hath  the  Lord 
done  for  me,  in  the  days  when  he  looked  ujDon  me 
to  take  away  my  reproach  among  men. 

And  in  the  sixth  month,  the  angel  Gabriel  was 
sent  by  God  into  Galilee,  to  a  city  named  Naza- 


21 


9.9 


^O 


26 


LUKE,    I. 


101 


28 

29 

30 
31 

32 
33 


36 


37 

38 


39 

40 
41 


27  reth,n  (27)  to  a  virgin  espoused  to  a  man  whose 
name  was  Joseph, o  of  the  house  of  David;  and  the 
virgin's  name  was  Mary.P  (28)  And  the  angel 
entered  the  house,  and  said  to  her :  Peace  to  thee, 
thou  full  of  grace  !  The  Lord  is  with  thee :  and 
blessed  art  thou  among  women.  (29)  And  when 
she  saw  [him],  she  was  agitated  by  his  speech ; 
and  she  pondered,  what  this  salutation  could  mean. 
(30)  And  the  angel  said  to  her :  Fear  not,  Mary ; 
for  thou  hast  found  favor  with  God.  (31)  For  lo, 
thou  wilt  conceive  in  thy  womb,  and  wilt  bear  a 
son,  and  wilt  call  his  name  Jesus.^  (32)  He  will 
be  great,  and  will  be  called  the  Son  of  the  Most 
High,  and  the  Lord  God  will  give  him  the  throne 
of  his  father  David.  (33)  And  he  will  reign  over 
the  house  of  Jacob  for  ever ;  and  of  his  reign  there 

34  will  be  no  end.  (34)  And  Mary  said  to  the  angel : 
How  can  this  be,  as  I  have  not  known  a  man? 

35  (35)  The  angel  replied,  and  said  to  her :  The  Holy 
Spirit  will  come,  and  the  power  of  the  Most  High 
will  overshadow  thee ;  therefore  he  that  is  born 
of  thee  is  holy,  and  will  be  called  the  Son  of  God. 
(36)  And  lo,  Elisabeth  thy  kinswoman,  even  she 
too  hath  conceived  a  son  in  her  old  age ;  and  this 
is  the  sixth  month  with  her  who  is  called  bar- 
ren. (37)  Because  nothing  is  diflicult  for  God. 
(38)  Mary  said:  Behold,  I  am  the  handmaid  of 
the  Lord;  be  it  to  me,  according  to  thy  word. 
And  the  angel  departed  from  her. 

And  Mary  arose  in  those  days,  and  went  hastily 
to  the  mountain  [district],  to  a  city  of  Judasa; 
(40)  and  entered  the  house  of  Zachariah,  and 
saluted  Elisabeth,  (41)  And  it  was  so,  that  when 
Elisabeth  heard  the  salutation  of  Mary,  the  child 
leaped  in  her  womb,  and  she  was  filled  Avith  the 

42  Holy  Spirit.  (42)  And  she  cried  out  with  a  loud 
voice,  and  said  to  Mary :  Blessed  art  thou  among 
women;    and  blessed  is  the  fruit  of  thy  womb. 

43  (43)  And  whence  is  this  to  me,  that  the  mother 

44  of  my  Lord  should  come  to  me  ?  (44)  For  lo,  as 
the  voice  of  thy  salutation  fell  upon  my  ears,  with 

45  great  joy  the  child  leaped  in  my  womb.  (45)  And 
happy  is  she  that  believed;  for  there  will  be  a 
fuliillment  of  those  things  that  were  told  her  by 

46  the  Lord. — (46)  And  iMary  said:    My  soul  doth 

47  magnify  the  Lord :  (47)  and  my  spirit  rejoiceth  in 


°  Sy.  .<yifrio  , 
P  Sy.  isCL.;lD 


Sy.  VX, 


102 


LUKE,    I. 


*  Sy.  give. 


Sy.  children 
of  her  kindred. 


or,  icas. 


God  tlie  authors  of  my  life.     (48)  For  lie  liatli  48 
looked  upon  the  humble  condition  of  his  hand- 
maid ;  and  lo,  henceforth  all  generations  will  asci'ibe* 
blessedness  to  me,     (49)  And  He  that  is  mighty  49 
hath  done  for  me  great  things;   and  holy  is  his 
name.     (50)  And  his  mercy  is  on  them  that  fear  50 
him,  for  generations  and  posterities.     (51)  He  hath  51 
wrought  victory  with  his  arm ;  and  hath  scattered 
the  proud  in  the  imagination  of  their  heart.    (52)  He  62 
hath  cast  down  the  mighty  from  their  thrones,  and 
hath  exalted  the  lowly.     (53)  The  hungry  hath  he  53 
satisfied  with  good  things,  and  the  rich  hath  he 
sent  away  empty,     (54)  He  hath  aided  Israel  his  54 
servant,  and  remembered  his  mercy,  (55)  (as  he  55 
spoke  with  the  fathers,)  with  Abraham  and  his 
seed,    for  ever. — {oQ)  And   Mary  remained  with  56 
Elisabeth  about  three  months,  and  returned  to  her 
home. 

And  Elisabeth's  time  of  bringing  forth  arrived;  57 
and  she  bore  a  son.     (58)  And  her  neighbors  and  58 
relatives^  heard  that  the  Lord  had  magnified  his 
mercy  to  her,  and  they  rejoiced  with  her,    (59)  And  59 
it  occurred,  that  on  the  eighth  day  they  came  to 
circumcise  the  child.     And  they  called  him  by  the 
name   of  his   father,    Zachariah.      (60)   And   his  60 
mother  answered  and   said:    ISTot  so;    but  John, 
shall  he  be  called.     (61)  And  they  said  to  her:  61 
There  is  no  one  among  thy  kindred  called  by  that 
name,    (62)  And  they  made  signs  to  his  father,  how  62 
he  would  have  him  named,    (63)  And  he  asked  for  63 
a  tablet,  and  wrote,  and  said:  John  is  his  name. 
And  every  one  was  surprised.     (64)  And  imme-  64 
diately  his  mouth  was  opened,  and  his  tongue ; 
and  he  spoke,  and  praised  God.     {'6b)  And  fear  65 
carne^v  upon  all  their  neighbors ;  and  these  things 
were  talked  of  in  all  the  mountain  [district]  of 
Judcca.     (66)  And  all  who  heard,  pondered  them  66 
in  their  heart,  and  said  :  What  will  this  child  be? 
And  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  with  him. — (67)  And  67 
Zachariah  his  father  was  filled  with  the  Holy  bpirit, 
and  prophesied,  and  said :  (68)  Blessed  be  the  Lord  68 
God  of  Israel,  who  hath  visited  his  people,  and 
wrought   redemption   for  them:    (69)   And   hath  69 
raised  up  a  horn  of  redemption  for  us,  in  the  house 
of  David  his  servant:   (70)  as  he  spake  by  the  70 
mouth  of  his   holy  prophets,   who  Avcre  of  old, 


LUKE,    II. 


103 


71  (71)  that  lie  would  redeem  us  from  our  enemies, 

72  and  from  the  hand  of  all  that  hate  us.  (72)  And 
he  hath  exercised  his  mercy  to  our  fathers,  and 

73  hath  remembered  his  holj  covenants,^  (73)  and 
the  oath  that  he  sware  to  Abraham  our  father,  that 

71  he  would  grant  to  us,  (71)  to  be  redeemed  from 
the  hand  of  our  enemies ;  and  that  we  should  wor- 

75  ship  before  him,  without  fear,  (75)  all  our  days,  in 

76  rectitude  and  uprightness.  (76)  And  thou,  child, 
wilt  be  called  a  prophet  of  the  Most  High;  for 
thou  wilt  go  before  the  face  of  the  Lord,  to  pre- 

77  pare  his  way,  (77)  that  he  may  give  the  knowledge 
of  lifey  to  his  people,  and  forgiveness  of  their  sins, 

78  (78)  through  the  compassion  of  the  mercy  of  our 
God ;  whereby  the  day-spring  from  on  high  will 

79  visit  us,  (79)  to  give  light  to  them  that  sit  in  dark- 
ness, and  in  the  shadow  of  death ;   and  to  guide 

80  our  feet  into  the  way  of  peace. — (80)  And  the 
child  grew,  and  was  strengthened  in  spirit.^  And 
he  was  in  the  wilderness,  until  the  day  of  his 
manifestation  to  Israel. 


II. 


10 


11 


And  in  those  days  it  occurred,  that  a  decree 
went  forth  from  Augustus  Coesar,  that  all  the 
people  of  his  dominion  should  be  enrolled.  (2) 
And  this  enrollment  was  first  made  under  the 
presidencya^  of  Quirinus  in  Syria.  (3)  And  every 
one  went  to  his  own  city  to  be  enrolled.  (4)  And 
Joseph  also  went  up  from  Nazareth  of  Galilee  to 
Judtea,  to  the  city  of  David  which  is  called  Bethle- 
hem, because  he  was  of  the  house  and  lineage  of 
David,  (5)  with  Mary  his  espoused,  then  pregnant, 
to  be  enrolled.  (6)  And  it  was  while  they  were 
there,  that  the  days  for  her  to  bring  forth  were 
completed.  (7)  And  she  brought  forth  her  first- 
born son,  and  Avrapped  him  in  bandages,  and  laid 
him  in  the  stall;  for  they  had  no  place  where 
the}^  could  lodge. 

And  there  were  shepherds  in  that  region,  who 
abode  there  and  kept  watch  of  their  flocks  by 
night.  (9)  And  lo,  the  angel  of  God  came  to  them, 
and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shone  upon  them :  and 
they  feared  with  great  fear.  (10)  And  the  angel 
said  to  them :  Fear  not ;  for,  behold  I  announce 
to  you  great  jov,  which  Avill  be  to  all  the  world.^ 
(11)  For  there  is  born  to  you  this  day  a  deliverer,  <= 


j01Q.Q_.A_*? 


>■  Sy.  UL 


or,  mind, 


^  Sy. 
"jIoAliZL.CrLO 

>cco  1  .3qjo? 


"=  Sy.  XoOi^ 


101 


LUKE,    II. 


''  Sy.  |V)\, 


Sy.  word. 


Sy.  word. 


e  Sy.  ivords. 


Sy.  give. 


Sy.  ^\V)- 


wlio  is  the  Lord  Messiah,  in  the  city  of  David. 
(12)  And  this  is  the  sign  for  you :   Ye  will  find  12 
the  babe  Avrapped  in  bandages,  and  placed  in  a 
stall.      (13)   And  instantly  there  were  seen  with  13 
the  angel,  the  many  hosts  of  heaven,  praising  God, 
and  saying:    (14)    Glory  to  God   in   the   highest  14 
[heavens],  and  on  earth  peace'^  and  good  hope  for 
men. — (15)  And  it  was  so,  that  when  the  angels  15 
had  gone  from  them  into  heaven,  the  shepherds  con- 
ferred with  one  another,  and  said :  Let  us  go  down 
to   Bethlehem,   and  see   this   things   Avhich   hath 
occurred,  as  the  Lord  hath  made  known  to  us. 
(16)  And  they  came  hastily,  and  found  Mary  and  16 
Joseph,  and  the  babe  laid  in  the  stall.     (17)  And  17 
when  they  saw,  they  made  known  the  information^ 
which   was  given  to  them  concerning  the  child. 
(18)  And  all  that  heard,  wondered  at  the  things  18 
that  were  told  them  by  the  shepherds.     (19)  And  19 
Mary  laid  up  all  these  things,"  and  pondered  them 
in  her  heart.     (20)  And  the  shepherds  returned,  20 
glorifying  and  praising  God  for  all  that  they  had 
seen  and  heard,  as  it  was  told  them. 

And  when  the  eight  days  for  the  circumcision  21 
of  the  child  were  completed,  his  name  was  called 
Jesus  ;  as  he  was  named  by  the  angel,  before  he 
was  conceived  in  the  Avomb. 

And  when  the  days  of  their  purification  were  22 
completed,   according  to  the  law  of  Moses,  they 
carried  him  to  Jerusalem,  to  present  him  before 
the  Lord :  (23)  (as  it  is  written  in  the  law  of  the  23 
Lord,  that  every  male  opening  the  womb  shall  be 
called  holy  to  the  Lord:)    (24)    and  to  ofier''  a  24 
sacrifice,  according  as  it  is  written  in  the  law  of 
the  Lord,  A  pair  of  turtle-doves,  or  two  young 
pigeons.     (25)    And  there  was  a  certain  man  in  25 
Jerusalem,  whose  name  was  Simeon.'     This  man 
was  u})right  and  just,  and  was  waiting  for  the  con- 
solation of  Israel,  and  the  Holy  Si)irit  was  upon 
him.     (26)  And  it  had  been  told  him  by  the  Holy  26 
Spirit,  that  he  would  not  see  death,  until  he  should 
see  the  Messiah  of  the  Lord.    (27)  This  man  came,  27 
by  the   Spirit,  into   the  temple;    and   when   his 
parents  brought  in  the  child  Jesus,  to  do  for  him 
as  is  commanded  in  the  law,    (28)  he  took  him  in  28 
his  arms,  and  blessed  God,  and  said:    (29)    My  29 
Lord,  now  release  thou  thy  servant  in  peace,  as 


LUKE,    II. 


105 


30 
81 
32 


3-: 


37 


39 


■10 


41 


thou  hast  said :  (30)  for  lo,  my  eyes  have  seen  thy 
mercy,  (31)  Avhich  thou  hast  prepared  in  the  pres 


ence  of  all  nations,  (32)  a  light  for  a  revelation  to 
the  Gentiles,  and  a  glory  for  thy  people  Israel. — 
(33)  And  Joseph  and  his  mother  were  astonished 
at  those  things  which  were  spoken  concerning  him. 

34  (34)  -And  Simeon  blessed  them,  and  said  to  Mary 
his  mother :  Behold,  this  [child]  is  set  forth  for 
the  fall  and  for  the  rising  of  many  in  Israel,  and 

35  for  a  standardly  of  contention;  (35)  (and  also  a  dart 
will  pierce  thy  own  soul) ;  that  the  thoughts  of  the 

36  hearts  of  many  may  be  disclosed. — (36)  And  Han- 
na,i  a  prophetess,  the  daughter  of  Phanuel,  of  the 
tribe  of  Asher, — she  also  was  aged  in  days,  and, 
fj'om  her  maidenhood,  had  lived  seven  years  with 
her  husband,  (37)  and  was  a  widow  of  about 
eighty  and  four  years,  and  departed  not  from  the 
temple,  but  worshipped  by  day  and  by  night,  with 
fasting  and  prayer ; — (38)  and  she  too  stood  up,  in 
that  hour,  and  gave  thanks  to  the  Lord,  and  spoke 
of  him  to  every  one  that  waited  for  the  redemption 
of  Jerusalem. — (39)  And  Avhen  they  had  accom- 
plished all  things,  according  to  the  law  of  the  Lord, 
they  returned  to  Galilee,  to  their  city  Nazareth. 
(40)  And  the  child  grew,  and  was  strengthened  in 
spirit,'"  and  was  filled  with  wisdom ;  and  the  grace 
of  God  was  upon  him. 

And   his  people  went  up  to  Jerusalem  every 

42  year,  at  the  feast  of  the  passover.  (42)  And  when 
he  was  twelve  years  old,  they  went  up  to  the  feast, 

43  as  they  were  accustomed.  (43)  .And  when  the 
days  were  completed,  they  returned  :  but  the  child 
Jesus  remained  at  Jerusalem,  and  Joseph  and  his 

44  mother  knew  not  [of  it] ;  (44)  for  they  supposed 
he  was  with  his  companions."  And  when  they  had 
travelled  a  day's  journey,  they  sought  him  among 
their  people,  and  [inquired]  of  every  one  that 
vuew  them.  (45)  And  they  did  not  find  him. 
And  they  returned  again  to  Jerusalem,  searching  for 
him.  (46)  And  after  three  days,  they  found  him 
in  the  temple,  sitting  in  the  midst  of  the  teachers,o 
and  listening  to  them,  and  asking  them  questions. 

47  (47)  And  all  they  that  heard  him,  were  astonished 

48  at  his  wisdom  and  his  answers.  (48)  And  when 
they  saw  him  they  were  amazed.  And  his  mother 
said  to  him:  My  son,  why  hast  thou  done  so  to  us? 


45  ki 


46 


^  Sy.  ]L]}o 


""  or,  mind. 


Sy.  sons  of 
the  company. 


Sy.]l^VV) 


106 


'  Sy. 

bSy.  ^ 

0  Sy.  ^d::^ 


^  Sy.  "Ul,, 

Gr.  TO  CiJT/Jpl 


LUKE,    III. 

For  lo,  I  and  tliy  father  liave  been  seeking  for 
thee  with  great  anxiety.     (49)  He  said  to  them :  49 
Why  did  ye  seek  me  ?     Do  ye  not  know,  that  it 
behooveth  me  to  be  in  m}''  Father's  house  ?    (50)  But  50 
they  did  not  comprehend  the  word  that  he  spoke 
to  them.     (51)  And  he  went  down  with  them,  and  51 
came  to  Nazareth,  and  was  obedient  to  theni;    And 
his  mother  laid  up  all  these  things  in  her  heart. 
(52)  And  Jesus  increased  in  stature,  and  in  wisdom,  52 
and  in  grace,  before  God  and  men. 

And  in  the  fifteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  Tiberius  III. 
Cicsar,   in  the   presidency^   of  Pontius   Pilate  in 
Judiea,  while  Herod  was  Tetrarch^  in  .Gralilee,  and 
Philip  his  brother  Tetrarch  in  Ituraja'^  and  in  the 
region  of  Trachonitis,<i  and  Lysanias  Tetrarch  of 
Abilene, e  (2)  in  the  high  priesthood  of  Annas^"  and    2 
of  Caiaphas  ;s  the  word  of  God  was  upon  John  the 
son  of  Zachariah,  in  the  wilderness.     (3)  And  he     3 
came  into  all  the  region  about  the  Jordan,  pro- 
claiming the  baptism  of  rcpentance'>  for  the  for- 
giveness of  sins.     (4)  As  it  is  written  in  the  book     4 
of  the  discourses'  of  Isaiah  the  prophet,  who  said : 
The  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  Avilderncss,  Prepare 
ye  the  way  of  the  Lord ;  and  make  straight  paths 
in  the  plain  for  our  God.     (5)  All  valleys  shall  be     5 
filled  up,  and  all  mountains  and  hills  be  lowered ; 
and  the  hillock  shall  be  levelled  down,  and  the 
rough  place  become  smooth.     (6)    And  all  flesh     6 
shall  see  the  life^  which  is  of  God. — (7)  And  he     7 
said  to  the  multitudes,  who  came  to  him  to  be 
baptized:    Ye    progeny  of   vipers,  who  hath  in- 
structed you  to  flee  from  the  future  wrath  ?    (8)     8 
Bring  forth,  therefore,  fruits  comporting  with  re- 
pentance.    And  begin  not  to  say  in  yourselves: 
We  have  Abraham  for  our  father ;  for  I  say  to 
you,  that  God  can,  from  these  stones,  raise  up  sons 
to  Abraham,     (9)   And  lo,  the  ax  is  put  to  the     9 
root  of  trees.     Every  tree  therefore  that  beareth 
not  good  fruits,  is  hewed  down,  and  falleth  into 
the  fire. — (10)  And  the  multitudes  asked  him,  and  10 
said:  What,  then,  shall  we  do?    (11)  He  answered,  11 
and  said  to  them:  Whoever  hath  two  tunics,  let 
him  give  [one]  to  him  that  hath  none;  and  who- 
ever hath  food,  let  him  do  the  same.     (12)  And  12 
publicans  also  came  to  be  baptized.    And  they  said 


LUKE,    III. 


107 


13 
U 

15 
16 

17 


18 
19 


20 
21 

99 


23 

21 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 


to  liim:  Teaclier,!  what  shall  we  do?  (13)  And 
he  said  to  them :  Exact  no  more  than  ye  are  re- 
quired to  exact.  (14)  And  those  serving  in  war 
inquired  of  him,  and  said  :  And  what  shall  we  do  ? 
lie  said  to  them:  Be  insolent  to  no  one,  and 
oppress  no  one,  and  let  your  pay  satisfy  you. — 
(15)  And  while  the  people  were  thinking  of  John, 
and  all  pondered  in  their  heart,  whether  he  were 
the  Messiah ;  (16)  John  answered  and  said  to 
them :  Behold,  I  baptize  you  with  water ;  but 
after  me  cometh  one  mightier  than  I,  the  strings 
of  Avhose  shoes  I  am  not  worthy  to  untie  ;  he  will 
baptize'"  you  with  the  Holy  Spirit  and  with  fire. 

(17)  He  holdeth  his  winnowing  shovel  in  his  hand, 
and  he  will  make  clean  his  threshino;  floor ;  and 
the  Avheat  lie  gathereth  into  his  garners,  and  the 
chaff  he    will   burn   with   fire   not  extinguished. 

(18)  And  many  other  things  also,  he  taught  and 
proclaimed  to  the  people.^ — (19)  But  Herod  the 
Tetrarch,  because  he  was  reproved  by  John,  on 
account  of  Herodias  the  wife  of  his  brother  Philip, 
and  on  account  of  all  the  evil  things  he  had  done, 

(20)  added  this  also  to  them  all,  that"  he  shut  uj) 
John  in  prison. 

And  it  occurred,  when  all  the  people  were  bap- 
tized, that  Jesus  also  was  baptized.  And  as  he 
prayed,  the  heavens  were  opened ;  (22)  and  the 
Holy  Spirit  descended  ujjon  him,  in  the  bodily 
likeness  of  a  dove :  and  there  was  a  voice  from 
heaven,  which  said :  Thou  art  my  beloved  Sou,  in 
whom  I  have  delight. 

And  Jesus  was  about  thirty  years  old.  And  he 
was  accounted  the  son  of  Joseph,  the  son  of  Heli, 

(21)  the  son  of  Matthat,  the  son  of  Levi,  the  son 
of  Melchi,  the  son  of  Janna,  the  son  of  Joseph, 

(25)  the  son  of  Mattathias,  the  son  of  Amos,  the  son 
of  Nahum,   the  son  of  Esli,  the  son  of  Naggai, 

(26)  the  son  of  Maath,  the  son  of  Mattathias,  the 
son  of  Shimei,  the  son  of  Joseph,  the  son  of  Judah, 

(27)  the  son  of  Joanna,  the  son  of  Rhesa,  the  son 
of  Zorubbabel,  the  son  of  Salathiel,  the  son  of 
Neri,  (28)  the  son  of  Melchi,  the  son  of  Addi,  the 
son  of  Cosam,  the  son  of  Elmodam,  the  son  of  Er, 

(29)  the  son  of  Joses,  the  son  of  Eliezer,  the  son 
of  Joram,   the  son  of  Matthat,  the  son  of  Levi, 

(30)  the  son  of  Simeon,  the  son  of  Judah,  the  son 


•  Sy.  ■jjLSillD 


Sy. 


Sy,  and. 


108 


Sv. 


''  Sy.  UL^LSi 
■=  Sy.  ]j4cQ 
"  Sy.  ]:.3] 


LUKE,    IV. 

of  Joseph,  the  son  of  Jonam,  the  son  of  Eliakim, 

(31)  the  son  of  Melcah,  the  son  of  Mainan,  the  son  31 
of  Mattatha,  the  son  of  Nathan,  the  son  of  David, 

(32)  the  son  of  Jesse,  the  son  of  Obed,  the  son  of  32 
Boaz,  the  son  of   Salmon,  the  son  of  Nahshon, 

(33)  the  son  of  Amminadab,  the  son  of  Earn,  the  33 
son  of  Hezron,  the  son  of  Pharez,  the  son  of  Judah, 

(34)  the  son  of  Jacob,  the  son  of  Isaac,  the  son  of  3-1 
Abraham,  the  son  of  Terah,  the  son  of  Nahor, 

(35)  the  son  of  Serug,  the  son  of  Reu,  the  son  of  35 
Peleg,  the  son  of  Eber,  the  son  of  Salah,  (36)  the  36 
son  of  Cainan,  the  son  of  Arphaxad,  the  son  of 
Shem,  the  son  of  Noah,  the  son  of  Lamech,  (37)  37 
the  son  of  Methuselah,  the  son  of  Enoch,  the  son 

of  Jared,  the  son  of  Mehalaleel,  the  son  of  Cainan, 
(38)  the  son  of  Enos,  the  son  of  Seth,  the  son  of  38 
Adam,  the  son  of  God. 

And  Jesus,  being  full  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  re-  TV. 
turned  from  the  Jordan.     And  the  Spirit  led  him 
into  the  wilderness,  (2)  forty  days,  to  be  tempted     2 
by  the  Calumniator.^     And  during  those  days,  he 
ate  nothing;   and  Avhen  he  had  completed  them, 
he  was  at  last  hungry.     (3)  And  the  Calumniator     3 
said  to  him :  If  thou  art  the  Son  of  God,  command 
this  stone  to  become  bread.     (-4)  Jesus  replied,  and     4 
said  to  him :  It  is  written.  Not  by  bread  only, 
doth   man   live ;    but   by   every   thing^   of  God. 
(5)  And  Satanc  conducted  him  to  a  high  mountain,     5 
and  showed  him  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  land,''  in 
a  little  time.     (6)  And  the  Calumniator  said  to     6 
him:  'To  thee  will  I  give  all  this  dominion,  and 
the  glory  of  it,  which  is  committed  to  me,  and  to 
whom  I  please,  I  give  it:    (7)  if  therefore  thou     7 
wilt  worship  before  me,  the  wnole  shall  be  thine. 
(8)  But  Jesiis  replied,  and  said  to  him:  It  is  Avritten,     8 
Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  him 
only  shalt  thou  serve.     (9)  And  he  brought  him     9 
to  Jerusalem,  and  set  him  on  a  pinnacle  of  the 
temple,  and  said  to  him :  If  thou  art  the  Son  of 
God,  cast  thyself  down  hence:  (10)  for  it  is  written,  10 
He  will  give  his  angels  charge  over  thee,  to  keep 
thee:  (11)  and  in  their  arms  will  they  sustain  thee,  11 
lest  thou  strike  thy  foot  against  a  stone.     (12)  And  12 
Jesus  replied  and  said  to  him:  It  is  said,  Thou 
shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God.— (13)  And  when  13 


the  Cnlumnintor  had  finished  all  his  temjDtations, 
he  departed  from  him  for  a  time. 

14  And  Jesus  returned,  in  the  power^  of  the  Spirit, 
to  Galilee  ;  and  fame  concerning  him  spread  in  all 

15  the  region  around  them.  (15)  And  he  taught  in 
their  synagogues,  and  was  lauded  by  every  one. — 

16  (16)  And  he  came  to  Nazareth,  where  he  had  been 
brought  up :  and  he  went,  as  he  was  accustomed, 
into  the  sj'nagogue  on  the  sabbath  day,  and  rose 

17  up  to  read.  (17)  iVnd  there  was  delivered  to  him 
the  book  of  Isaiah  the  prophet.  And  Jesus  opened 
the  book,  and  found  the  place  where  it  is  written : 

18  (18)  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me;  and  there- 
fore he  hath  anointed  me  to  proclaim  tidings  to 
the  poor ;  and  hath  sent  me  to  heal  the  contrite  in 
heart,  and  to  proclaim  release  to  the  captives,  and 
sight  to  the  blind ;   and  to  send  away  the  contrite 

19  with  forgiveness  [of  their  sins] ;  (19)  and  to  pro- 

20  claim  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord.  (20)  And 
he  rolled  up  the  book,  and  gave  it  to  the  servitor,  f 
and  went  and  sat  down.     And  the  eyes  of  all  in 

21  the  sjaiagogue  were  gazing  upon  him.  (21)  And 
he  began  to  say  to  them :  This  day,  is  this  scrip- 

22  ture  which  ye  have  heard,  fulfilled.  (22)  And  all 
bare  him  witness,  and  admired  the  gracious  words 
which  proceeded  from  his  mouth ;  and  they  said:  Is 

23  not  this  the  son  of  Joseph  ?  (23)  Jesus  said  to  them : 
Perhaps,  ye  will  speak  to  me  this  proverb.  Physician, 
heal  thyself:  and  whatever  we  have  heard  of  thy 
doing  in  Capernaum,  do  thou  here  also  in  thy  city. 

2-1  (24)  And  he  said  to  them :  Verily  I  say  to  you. 
There  is  no  prophet  who  is  acceptable  in  his  own 

25  city.  (25)  And  I  tell  you  the  truth,  that  there 
were  many  widows  in  the  house  of  Israel,  in  the 
days  of  Elijah  the  prophet,  when  the  heavens  were 
closed  up  three  years  and  six  months,  and  there 

26  was  a  great  famine  in  all  the  land:  (26)  but  to  no 
one  of  them  was  Elijah  sent,  except  to  Sareptas 

27  of  Sidon,  unto  a  widow  woman.  (27)  And  there 
were  many  leprous  in  the  house  of  Israel,  in  the 
days  of  Elisha  the  prophet ;  but  none  of  them  was 

28  cleansed,  except  Naaman  the  Syrian. ^ — (28)  And 
when  they  heard  these  things,  those  in  the  syna- 

29  gogue  were  all  filled  with  wrath.  (29)  And  they 
rose  up,  and  thrust  him  out  of  the  cit}^,  and 
brought  him  to  the  top  of  the  hill  on  which  the 


Sy.U 


j-kkII) 


Sy. 


Sy.  d^i^ 
Sy.  "UlD?! 


110 


LUKE,    V. 


I  city  was  built,  tliat  they  miglit  cast  liim  down  from 
the  rock.     (30)  But  he  passed  through  the  midst 


50 


of  them,  and  went  away. 

And  he  went  down  to  Capernaum,  a  city  of  31 
GaHlee;  and  taught  them  on  sabbath  days.     (32)  32 

or,  doctrine.     !  And  thc}^  were  astonished  at  his  teaching,'  for  his 

Sy. ^\a^ ; word  was  authoritative.^^     (33)  And  there  was  in  33 
|the- synfigogue  a  man,  in  whom  was  an  unclean 

Sy- l?l^        [demon:!    and  he   cried  out,  with   a  loud   voice, 

j  (34)  and  said :  Let  me  alone :  What  have  I  to  do  34 

'  Sy.  |j;_0  [with  thee,  Jesus,  thou  Nazarean?"'  Hast  thou 
come  to  destroy  us  ?  I  know  thee,  who  thou  art, 
the  Holy  One  of  God.  (35)  And  Jesus  rebuked  35 
him,  and  said :  Shut  thy  mouth ;  and  come  out  of 
him.  And  the  demon  threw  him  down  in  the 
midst,  and  came  out  of  him,  having  not  harmed 
him  at  all.  (36)  And  wonder  seized  every  one ;  36 
and  they  talked  together,  and  said :  What  a  word  is 

Sy.  |Ja_KK£D    this!    For,  with  authority  and  efficiency,"  he  com- 
mandeth  the  unclean  spirits,  and  they  come  out. 
(37)  And  his  fame  went  out  into  all  the  surround-  37 
ing  region. 

And  when  Jesus  went  out  of  the  synagogue,  he  38 
entered  the  house  of  Simon.     And  the  mother-in- 

Sy. great,        law  of  Simon  was  afflicted  with  a  severe"  fever: 

and  they  besought  him  in  her  behalf     (39)  And  39 
he  stood  over  her,  and  rebuked  the  fever ;  and  it 
left-  her.      And  immediately  she  arose  and  min- 
istered to  them. — (40)  And  when  the  sun  was  set,  40 
all  those  that  had  sick  persons,  afflicted  with  divers 
diseases,  brought  them  to  him;   and  he  laid  his 
hand  on  every  one  of  them,   and   healed  them. 
(41)  And  demons  went  out  of  many,  crying  out  41 
and  saying :  Thou  art  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of  God. 
And  he  rebuked  them,  and  suffered  them  not  to 
say,  that  they  knew  him  to  be  Messiah, — (42)  And  42 
at  the  dawn  of  day,  he  went  out  and  retired  to  a 
desert    place.     And  the  multitudes  sought  him, 
and  went  out  to  him,  and  held  him  fast,  that  he 
might  not  retire  from  them.     (43)  And  Jesus  said  43 
to  them :  It  behooveth  me  to  announce  the  king- 
dom of  God  to  other  cities  also ;  for  therefore  was 
I  sent.     (44)  And  he  preached  in  the  synagogues  44 
of  Galilee. 

And  it  occurred,  that  a  multitude  gathered  about  Y. 


LUKE,    V. 


Ill 


liim,  to  hear  the  word  of  God.     And  he  was  stand- 

2  iug  by  the  side  of  the  sea  of  Genuesaret,  (2)  and 
he  saw  two  ships  standing  near  the  sea,  and  the 
fishermen  were  gone  out  of  them,  and  were  wash- 

3  ing  their  nets.  (3)  And  one  of  them  belonged  to 
Simon  Cephas:^  and  Jesus  entered  and  sat  in  it. 
And  he  told  them  to  draw  off  a  little  from  the 
shore,  into  the  sea :  and  he  seated  himself,  and  taught 

4  the  multitude  from  the  ship. — (-1)  And  when  he 
ceased  from  speaking,  he  said  to  Simon :  Launch 
out  into  the  deep,  and  cast  your  net  for  a  draught. 

5  (5)  Simon  answered,  and  said  to  him:  Eabbi,^  all 
the  night  we  have  toiled,  and  have  caught  nothing : 

6  but,  at  thy  bidding,  ^  I  will  cast  the  net.  (6)  And 
when  they  had  done  so,  they  inclosed  very  many 

7  fishes,  so  that  the  net  was  rent.  (7)  And  they 
made  signs  to  their  associates,  in  the  other  ship,  to 
come  and  help  them.  And  when  they  came,  they 
filled  both  the  ships,  so  that  they  were  near  to 

8  sinking.  (8)  And  when  Simon  Cephas  saw  [it], 
he  fell  before  the  feet  of  Jesus,  and  said  to  him : 
I  beseech  thee,  my  Lord,  that  thou  leave  me,  for  I 

9  am  a  sinful  man.  (9)  For  astonishment  had  seized 
him,  and  all  that  were  with  him,  at  the  draught  of 

10  fishes  which  they  had  caught :  (10)  and  in  like 
manner  also  James  and  John,  the  sons  of  Zebedee, 
who  were  partners  of  Simon.  But  Jesus  said: 
Fear  thou  not ;  henceforth  thou  shalt  catch  men 

11  unto  life.<^  (11)  And  they  brought  the  vessels  to 
the  land :  and  they  left  all  and  followed  him. 

12  And  when  Jesus  was  in  one  of  the  cities,  a  man 
came  all  full  of  leprosy,  and  seeing  Jesus,  he  fell 
upon  his  face,  and  besought  him,  and  said  to  him  : 
My   Lord,   if  thou  wilt,   thou   canst  cleanse  me. 

13  (13)  And  Jesus  put  forth  his  hand,  and  touched 
him,  and  said  to  him :  I  will  [it]  ;  be  thou  clean. 
And    immediately   his   leprosy  went  from    him. 

1-4  (1-4)  And  he  charged  him :  Speak  to  no  one ;  but  go 
and  show  thyself  to  the  priests,  and  offer  the  obla- 
tion for  thy  purification,  as  Moses  hath  commanded, 

15  for  a  testimony  to  them. — (15)  And  his  fiime  spread 
abroad  still  more:  and  much  people  assembled 
to  hear  him,  and  to  be  cured  of  their   diseases. 

16  (16)  And  he  retired  into  a  desert,  and  prayed. 

17  And  it  occurred,  on  one  of  the  days  when  Jesus 
was  teaching  that  Pharisees  and  Doctors  of  the 


*  Gr.  Simon. 


^  Sy.  a.^5 

•=  or,  word. 


■■Sy.  "^lA 


112 


LUKE,    V. 


Sy.  .1  g^ 


:iD 


]rrioVni 


'  Sy.  ]Jj 


Sy.  "h^O.^ 


•■  Sy.  ]m^^n 
'  Sy.  uoX 


Sy.  sons. 


lawe  were  sitting  bj,  who  had  come  from  all  the 
villages  of  Galilee  and  of  Judoea,  and  Jerusalem  : 
and  the  power^  of  the  Lord  was  present  to  heal 
them.     (18)    And  some  persons  brought  a  para-  18 
Ij'tic  man,  on  a  couch,  and  sought  to  bring  him  in, 
and  to  place  him  before  him.      (19)   And  when  19 
they  could  not  thus  introduce  him,  because  of  the 
multitude  of  the  people,  thej  ascended  to  the  roof, 
and  let  him  down  Avith  the  couch,  from  the  cover- 
ing, into  the  midst,  before  Jesus.     (20)  And  when  20 
Jesus  saw  their  faith,   he  said  to  the  paralytic: 
Man,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee.     (21)    And  the  21 
Scribes  and  Pharisees  began  to  reason,  and  to  say : 
Who  is  this  that  speaketh  blasphemy  ?s    Who  can 
forgive  sins,  but  God  only  ?    (22)  And  Jesus  knew  22 
their  thoughts,  and  said  to  them :  W^hat  think  ye 
in  your  heart  ?     (23)  Which  is  the  easier,  to  say,  23 
Thj^  sins  are  forgiven  thee,  or  to  say.  Arise  and 
walk  ?     (2-1)  But  that  ye  may  know,  that  the  Son  21 
of  man  is  competent  to  forgive  sins  on  the  earth, — 
he  said  to  the  paralj'tic :  I  say  to  thee,  Arise,  take 
up  thy  couch,  and  go  to  thy  home.     (25)  And  in-  25 
stautly,  he  rose  up  before  their  cjes,  and  took  up 
his  couch,  and  went  home,  glorifying  God.     (26)  26 
And   astonishment  seized   every  one;    and  they 
praised  God ;  and  they  were  filled  with  awe,  and 
said  :  We  have  seen  wonders  to-day. 
•  And  after  these  things,  Jesus  went  out  and  saw  27 
a  publican, ii  named  Levi,'  sitting  among  the  publi- 
cans; and  he  said  to  him:  Come  after  me.     (28)  28 
And  he  left  every  thing,  and  arose,  and  went  after 
him.     (29)  And  Levi  made  a  great  entertainment  29 
for  him  at  his  house ;  and  there  was  a  numerous 
company  of  publicans  and  others  who  reclined  with 
them.     (30)  And  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  mur-  30 
mured,  and.  said  to  his  disciples :  AVhy  do  ye  eat 
and  drink  with  publicans  and  sinners?     (31)  And  31 
Jesus  answered  and  said  to  them :  A  ph3'sician  is 
not  sought  after  for  the  well,  but  for  those  very 
sick.     (32)  I  came  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but  32 
sinners,  to  repentance. 

And  they  said  to  him :  Why  do  the  disciples  of  33 
John  fast  often,  and  pray,  and  also  [those]  of  the 
Pharisees;    but  thine  eat  and  drink?     (34)    And  34 
he  said  to  them :    Ye  cannot  make  the  guests''  of 
the  nuptial  chamber  fast,  while  the  bridegroom  is 


LUKE,    VI. 


113 


35  Avith  them.  (35)  But  the  days  will  come,  when  the 
bridegroom  will  be  taken  up  from  them,  and  then 

36  will  they  fast,  in  those  days.  (36)  And  he  spoke 
a  similitude^  to  them  :  No  one  teareth  a  patch  from 
a  new  garment,  aijd  putteth  it  to  an  old  garment ; 
lest  he  tear  the  new,  and  the  patch  from  the  new 

37  cease  to  make  the  old  [garment]  whole.  (37)  And 
no  one  putteth  new  wine  into  old  sacks ;  otherwise, 
tiic  new  wine  will  burst  the  sacks,  and  the  wine 

38  will  run  out,  and  the  sacks  be  ruined.  (38)  But 
they  put  new  wine  into  new  sacks,  and  both  are 

39  preserved.  (39)  And  no  one  drinketh  old  wine, 
and  immediately  calleth  for  new ;  for  he  saith.  The 
old  is  the  delicious. 

YI.  And  on  a  sabbath  it  occurred,  as  Jesus  walked 
among  the  tilled  grounds,  that  his  disciples  plucked 

2  ears,  and  rubbed  them  in  their  hands  and  ate.  (2) 
And  some  of  the  Pharisees  said  to  them :  Why  do 
ye  that,  which  it  is  not  lawful  to  do  on  the  sabbath  ? 

3  (3)  Jesus  replied,  and  said  to  them :  Have  ye  not 
read  what  David  did,  when  he  was  hungry,  he  and 

•i  those  with  him  ?  (4)  How  he  entered  into  the 
house  of  God,  and  took  and  ate  the  bread  of  the 
Lord's  table,  and  gave  [it]  to  those  that  were  with 
liirn;    which   it  was   not   lawful,   except   for    the 

5  priests  only,  to  eat  ?  (5)  And  he  said  to  them : 
The  Son  of  man  is  lord  of  the  sabbath. 

6  And  on  another  sabbath,  he  entered  a  synagogue 
and  taught.     And  a  man  was  there,  whose  right 

7  hand  was  withered.  (7)  And  the  Scribes  and 
Pharisees  watched  him,  whether  he  would  heal  on 
the  sabbath ;    that  they  might  be  able  to  accuse 

8  him.  (8)  And  as  he  knew  their  thoughts,  he  said 
to  the  man  with  a  withered  hand :  Rise  and  come 
into  the  midst  of  the  congregation.     And  when  he 

9  came  and  stood  [there],  (9)  Jesus  said  to  them :  I 
ask  you,  What  is  it  lawful  to  do  on  the  sabbath  ? 
that  which  is  good  ?  or  that  which  is  evil  ?  to  save 

10  life  ?  or  to  destroy  [it]  ?  (10)  And  he  looked  upon 
them  all ;  and  [then]  said  to  him.  Stretch  forth 
thy  hand.     And  he  stretched  out  his  hand,  and  it 

11  was  restored  like  the  other. ^  (11)  And  they  were 
filled  with  envy ;  and  they  conferred  one  with 
another,  what  they  should  do  to  Jesus. 

12  And  in  those  days,  Jesus  retired  to  a  mountain 


or,  parable. 


"  Sy.  its  fellow. 


114 


LUKE,    VI. 


''Sy.'U>.\», 
or,  Apostles. 

<=  Gr.  IIsVpoj. 
a  Sy. 

«  Sy.  Ili4 
f  Sy. 

e  Sy. 

''  or,  word. 


Sy.]J. 


to  piay  ;  and  lie  passed  the  niglit  there,  in  prayer 
to  God.    (13)  And  when  the  day  dawned,  he  called  13 
his  disciples,  and  selected  from  them  twelve,  whom 
he  named  Legates  :*>  (14)  Simon  whom  he  named  l-l 
Cephas,'^  and  Andrew  his  brother,  and  James,  and 
John,    and    Philip,   and   Bartholomew,    (15)    and  15 
Matthew,  and  Thomas,  and  James  the  son  of  Al- 
pheus,*^  and  Simon  who  was  called  Zelote3,<5  (16)  16 
and  Judas  the  son  of  James, ^  and  Judas  Iscariot,^ 
who  became  a  traitor. — (17)  And  Jesus  descended  17 
with  them,  and  stood  in  the  plain;  and  a  great 
company  of  his  disciples,  and  a  multitude  of  assem- 
bled people,  from  all  Judoea,  and  from  Jerusalem, 
and  from  the  sea-shore  of  Tyre  and  Sidon ;  who 
came  to  hear  his  discourse,^  and  to  be  healed  of 
their  diseases ;  (18)  and  they  who  were  afflicted  by  18 
unclean  spirits :  and  they  were  healed.     (19)  And  19 
the   whole   multitude  sought  to  touch  him  ;    for 
there  went  a  virtue'  out  of  him  and  healed  them 
all. 

And  he  lifted  his  eyes  upon  his  disciples,  and  20 
said :  Blessed  are  ye  poor ;  for  the  kingdom  of  God 
is  yours.     (21)  Blessed  are  ye  that  hunger  now;  21 
for  ye  will  be  satisfied.     Blessed  are  ye  that  weep 
now ;   for  ye   will  laugh.      (22)    Blessed  are  ye,  22 
when  men  shall  hate  you,  and  repel  you,  and  re- 
vile you,  and  cast  out  your  names  as  base,  for  the    - 
Son  of  man's  sake.     (23)  Rejoice  in  that  day  and  23 
exult,  for  your  reward  is  great  in  heaven ;  for  so 
did  their  fathers  to  the  prophets.    (24)  But,  woe  to  24 
you  that  are  rich  ;  for  ye  have  received  your  con- 
solation. .  (25)  "Woe  to  you  that  are  full ;  for  ye  25 
will  hunger.     Woe  to  you  that  laugh  now ;  for  ye 
will  weep  and  mourn.     (26)  Woe  to  you,  when  26 
men  shall  speak  your  praise;  for  so  did  their  fii- 
thers  to  the  false  prophets. — (27)  And  to  you  who  27 
hear,  I  say  :  Love  your  enemies  ;  and  do  favors  to 
them  that  hate  you ;  (28)  and  bless  them  that  curse  28 
you;  and  pray  for  them  that  drag  you  with  vio- 
lence.     (29)    To   him   that  smiteth  thee  on  thy  29 
cheek,  offer  the  other ;  and  from  him  that  taketh 
away  thy  cloak,  keep  not  back  thy  tunic.    (30)  To  30 
ever}'-  one  that  asketh  of  thee,  give  thou :  and  from 
him   that   taketh    thy   property,    demand   it   not. 
(31)  And  as  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to  you,  so  31 
do  ye  also  to  them.    (32)  For,  if  ye  love  them  that  32 


LUKE,    VI. 

love  you,  what  goodness  is  it  in  you  ?  For  even 
33  sinners  love  those  that  love  them.  (33)  And  if  ye 
do  good  to  them  that  do  good  to  you,  what  good- 
ness is  it  in  you  ?  For  even  sinners  do  the  same. 
3-1:  (34)  And  if  ye  lend  to  one  from  whom  ye  expect 
recompense,  what  goodness  is  it  in  you  ?  For 
sinners  also  lend  to  sinners,  to  receive  adequate 

35  recompense.  (35)  But  love  ye  your  enemies,  and 
do  them  good;  and  lend  ye,  and  disappoint  the 
hopes  of  no  one :  and  great  will  be  your  reward, 
and  ye  will  be  children  of  the  Highest ;  for  he  is 

36  kind  to  the  evil,  and  to  the  unthankful.  (36)  Be 
ye  therefore  merciful,  as  also  your  Father  is  merci- 

37  ful.  (37)  Judge  not,  and  ye  will  not  be  judged : 
condemn  not,  and  ye  will  not  be  condemned :  re- 

38  lease,  and  je  will  be  released.  (38)  Give  ye,  and 
it  will  be  given  to  you ;  in  good  measure,  pressed 
down,  and  running  over,  will  they  cast  into  your 
lap.     For,  with  what  measure  ye  measure,  it  will 

39  be  measured  to  you. — (39)  And  he  spake  a  simili- 
tude^  to  them :  Can  a  blind  man  lead  a  blind  ? 

40  Will  not  both  fall  into  the  ditch  ?— (40)  No  disci- 
ple is  better  than  his  teacher  ;i  for  Avhoever  is  per- 

41  feet,  will  be  like  his  teacher. — (41)  And  why 
observest  thou  the  straw  that  is  in  thy  brother's 
eye,  but  regardest  not  the  beam  that  is  in  thy  own 

42  eye  ?  (42)  Or  how  canst  thou  say  to  thy  brother, 
My  brother,  allow  me  to  pluck  the  straAV  from  th}^ 
eye ;  when,  lo,  the  beam  *  that  is  in  thy  own  eye, 
thou  regardest  not.  Hypocrite !  first  cast  the  beam 
out  thy  eye,  and  then  thy  vision  will  be  clear  to 

43  pluck  the  straw  from  thy  brother's  eye.  (43)  There 
is  no  good  tree,  that  beareth  bad  fruits ;  nor  a  bad 

44  tree,  that  beareth  good  fruits.  (44)  For  every  tree 
is  known  by  its  fruits.  Do  men  gather  figs  from 
thorn-bushes?     So,  neither  do  they  pluck  grapes 

45  from  brambles.  (45)  A  good  man,  from  the  good 
treasure  that  is  in  his  heart,  bringeth  out  good 
things :  and  a  bad  man,  from  the  bad  treasure  that 
is  in  his  heart,  bringeth  out  bad  things.     For,  from 

46  the  abundance  of  the  heart,  the  lips  speak.  (46)  And 
wh}^  call  ye  me,  My  Lord,  my  Lord ;  while  ye  do 

47  not  that  which  I  command  you  ?  (47)  Every  one 
that  Cometh  to  me,  and  heareth  my  words,  and 
doeth   them,   I   will   show   to  whom  he  is  like: 

48  (48)  He  is  like  a  man  that  built  a  house ;  and  he 


115 


^  or,  parable. 
■  Sv.  Rabbi. 


116 


LUKE,   VII. 


Sy.  (  «  «  »  ("^ 


'  or,  a  syna- 
gogue. 


Sy.  liand. 


Sy. 


r-l 


dug  and  went  deep,  and  laid  the  foundations  on  a 
rock  :  and  when  a  flood  occurred,  the  flood  rushed 
upon  that  house,  and  could  not  move  it,  for  its 
foundation  rested  on  a  rock,  (49)  But  he  that  49 
heareth  and  doeth  not,  is  like  a  man  that  built  his 
house  upon  the  earth,  without  a  foundation ;  and 
when  the  torrent  rushed  upon  it,  it  fell  immediately, 
and  the  ruin  of  that  house  was  great. 

And  when  he  had  finished  all  these  discourses  YII. 
in   the    audience    of   the    people,    Jesus   entered 
into  Capernaum.     (2)  And  the  servant  of  a  cen-     2 
turion,  who  was  dear  to  him,  was  very  sick,  and 
near  to  death.     (3)  And  he  heard  of  Jesus,  and     3 
sent  the  Elders'^  of  the  Jews  to  him,  and  requested 
of  him  that  he  would  come  and  save  the  life  of  his 
servant.     (4)  And  when  they  came  to  Jesus,  they     4 
entreated  him  earnestly,  and  said:  He  is  worthy 
that  thou  shouldst  do  this  for  him  ;  (5)  for  he  loveth     5 
our  nation,  and   hath    also    built   us   a   house  of 
assembly.'^     (G)  And  Jesus  went  with  them.     And     6 
when  he  was  not  far  from  the  house,  the  centurion 
sent  his  friends  to  him,  and  said  to  him  :  My  Lord, 
trouble  not  thyself,  for  I  am  not  worthy  that  thou 
shouldst   come   under   my   roof:    (7)  therefore   I     7 
deemed    myself   not    worthy    to    approach    thee 
myself;  but  speak  the  word  only,  and  my  young 
man  will  be  healed.     (8)  For  1  also  am  a  man     8 
subjected  to  authority ;  and  I  have  soldiers  under 
my  command  j"^  and  I  say  to  this  one,  Go;  and  he 
goeth :    and  to  another.  Come ;    and  he  cometli : 
and  to  my  servant,  Do  this ;  and  he  doeth  [it.] 
(9)  And  when  Jesus  heard  these  things,  he  admired     9 
him ;  and  he  turned,  and  said  to  the  throng  that 
followed  him :  I  say  to  you,  I  have  not  found  faith 
like  this  even  in  Israel.     (10)  And  they  that  were  10 
sent,  returned  to  the  house ;  and  they  found  the 
servant  that  had  been  sick,  now  well. 

And  the  following  day,  he  went  to  a  city  called  11 
Nain  ;d  and  his  disciples  [were]  with  him,  and  a 
great  multitude.     (12)  And  as  he  approached  the  12 
gate  of  the  city,  he  saw  a  procession  bearing  a  dead 
man,  the  only  son^  of  his  mother,  and  she  a  widow ; 
and  a  great  company  of  the  people^"  of  the  city 
were  Avith  her.     (13)  And  Jesus  looked  upon  her,  13 
and  had  compassion  on  her ;   and  he  said  to  her, 


LUKE,    VII. 


11^ 


15 

16 


17 


18 
19 


20 


21 


22 


14  Weep  not.  (14)  And  he  went,  and  touclied  the 
bier ;  and  thej  that  bore  him  stood  still.  And  he 
said :  Young  man,  I  say  to  thee,  Arise.  (15)  And 
the  dead  man  sat  up,  and  began  to  speak :  and  he 
delivered  him  to  his  mother.  (16)  And  awe 
seized  all  the  people  ;  and  they  glorified  God,  and 
said:  A  great  prophet  hath  arisen  among  us,  and 
God  hath  visited  his  people.  (17)  And  that 
saying?  respecting  him  went  out  through  all  Juda3a 
and  all  the  surrounding  region. 

And  the  disciples  of  John  told  him  all  these 
things.  (19)  And  John  called  two  of  his  disciples, 
and  sent  them  to  Jesus,  and  said :  Art  thou 
he  that  cometh,  or  shall  we  look  for  another? 
(20)  And  they  came  to  Jesus,  and  said  to  him : 
John  the  Baptizer  hath  sent  us  to  thee,  and 
saith  :  Art  thou  he  that  cometh,  or  shall  we  look 
for  another?  (21)  And  in  that  hour  he  healed 
many  persons  of  their  diseases,  and  of  plagues,  and 
of  unclean  spirits,  and  gave  sight  to  many  blind 
persons.  (22)  And  Jesus  replied,  and  said  to 
them :  Go  ye,  and  tell  John  all  that  ye  have  seen 
and  heard ;  that  the  blind  see,  and  the  lame  walk, 
and  the  leprous  are  cleansed,  and  the  deaf  hear, 
and  the  dead  arise,  and  to  the  poor  good  news  is 
23  proclaimed  -.^  (23)  and  blessed  is  he  that  is  not 
21  stumbled  in  me. — (21)  And  when  John's  disciples 
were  gone,  Jesus  began  to  say  to  the  multitude, 
concerning  John  :  What  went  ye  into  the  wilder- 

25  ness  to  see  ? — a  reed  agitated  by  the  wind?  (25)  Or 
if  not ;  what  went  ye  out  to  see  ? — a  man  clad  in 
soft  raiment?  Lo,  they  that  use  splendid  garments 

26  and  luxuries,  are  in  kings'  palaces.'  (26)  Or  if 
not;  what  went  ye  out  to  see? — a  prophet?    Yea, 

27  say  I  to  you;  and  more  than  a  prophet.  (27) 
[For]  this  is  he,  of  whom  it  is  written :  Behold  I 
send  my  messenger ^  before  thy  face,  to  prepare 

28  thy  way  before  thee.  (28)  I  say  to  you,  that  no 
prophet,  among  those  born  of  women,  was  greater 
than  John  the  Baptizer :  and  yet  the  little  one  in 

29  the  kingdom  of  God,  is  .greater  than  he.  (29)  And 
all  the  people  that  heard  him,  justified  God,  as  they 

30  had  been  baptized  with  John's  baptism.  (30)  But 
the  Pharisees  and  Scribes  rejected  the  good  pleasure 
of  God,    against   themselves;    as   they   were   not 

31  baptized  by  him.     (31)  To  what,  therefore,  shall  I 


?  or,  word. 


or,  houses. 


^  Sy.  ^;uo]]Ld 


'  Sy.  li\ki::L»o 


compare  this  generation  ?    and  to  what  are  thej 
like  ?     (32)  They  are  hke  children,  that  sit  in  the  32 
market-place,  and  call  to  their  fellows  and  Si^y : 
We  have  piped  to  you,  and  ye  did  not  dance ;  we 
have    howled    to    you,    and    ye    did    not   weep. 
(33)  For  John  the  Baptizer  came,  not  eating  bread,  33 
and  not  drinking  wine ;  and  ye  say :  He  hath  a 
demon,     (o-i)  The  Son  of  man  came,  eating  and  34 
drinking  ;  and  ye  sa}'- :  Behold,  a  gluttonous  man, 
and  a  wine  drinker,  and  one  fond  of  publicans  and 
sinners.     (35)  But  wisdom^  is  justified  by  all  her  35 
children. 

And  one  of  the  Pharisees  came,  and  asked  him  36 
to  eat  with  him.     And  he  entered  the  house  of  the 
Pharisee,  and  reclined.     (37)   And  there  was  a  37 
woman  in  the  city,  who  was  a  sinner;  and  Avhen 
she    learned  that  he   reclined    in   the  Pharisee's 
house,    she   took   an   alabaster  box   of   perfume, 
(38)  and  stood  behind  him,  at  his  feet,  and  wept ;  38 
and  she  began  to  bathe  his  feet  with  her  tears,  and 
to  wipe  them  with  the  hair  of  her  head  ;    and  she 
kissed  his  feet,  and  anointed  [them]  with  the  per- 
fume.    (39)  And  when  the  Pharisee  that  invited  39 
him,  saw  it,  he  thought  within  himself,  and  said : 
If  this  man  were  a  prophet,  he  would  know  who 
she  is,  and  what  is  her  reputation  ;  for  the  woman 
that  toucheth  him,  is  a  sinner.     (40)  And  Jesus  40 
answered,  and  said  to  him:  Simon,  I  have  some- 
thing to  say  to  thee.     He  said  to  him:  Say  it, 
Eabbi.     Jesus  said  to  him  :     (41)  There  were  two  41 
debtors  to  a  certain  creditor ;   the  one  owed  him 
five  hundred  denarii,  and  the  other  fifty  denarii. 
(42)  And  as  they  had  not  the  means  of  pay,  he  42 
released  them  both.      Wbich  of  them,  therefore, 
will  love  him  most?      (43)    Simon  replied,   and  43 
said :  I  suppose  he  to  whom  most  was  released. 
Jesus  said  to  him :  Thou  hast  judged  correctly. 
(44)  And  he  turned  to  the  woman,  and  said  to  44 
Simon :    Seest  thou  this  woman  ?    I  entered  thy 
house,   and   thou   gavcst   [me]   no  water  for   my 
feet ;  but  she  hath  bathed  my  feet  with  her  tears, 
and  wiped  them  Avitli  her  hair.     (45)  Thou  gavest  45 
me  no  kiss ;   but  this  woman,  since  she  came  in, 
hath  not  ceased  to  kiss  my  feet.     (46)  Thou  didst  46 
iu)t  anoint  my  head  with  perfume;  but  she  luilh 
anointed  my  feet  with  perfumed  ointment.     (47)  I  47 


LUKE,    VIII. 


119 


therefore  say  to  thee :  Her  many  sins  are  forgiven 
her,  for  she  loveth  much.     But  he,  to  whom  little 

48  is  forgiven,  lovetli  little,     (48)  And  he  said  to  the 

49  Avoman :  Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee.  (49)  And 
they  that  were,  reclining,  began  to  say  in  them- 
selves :    Who  is  this,  that  even   forgiveth   sins  ? 

60  (50)  And  Jesus  said  to  the  woman :  Thy  faith 
hath  given  thee  life.     Go.  in  peace. 

VIII.  And  after  these  things  Jesus  travelled  about 
the  cities  and  the  villages,  and  proclaimed  and 
announced  the  kingdom  of  God.     And  with  him 

2  were  his  twelve  [disciples,]  (2)  and  those  women 
who  were  healed  of  infirmities  and  of  unclean 
spirits,  Mary  called  Magdalena,!^  out  of  whom  went 

3  seven  demons,  (3)  and  Joanna^  the  wife  of  Chusa, 
Herod's  steward,  and  Susanna, *'-  and  many  others, 
who  ministered  to  them  of  their  property. 

4  And  when  a  great  multitude  was  assembled,  and 
people  came  to  him  from  all  the  cities,  he  said,  in 

5  similitudes  -A  (o)  A  sower  went  out  to  sow  his 
seed :  and  as  he  sowed,  some  fell  by  the  side  of 
the   path,    and   was    trodden   upon,    and   a   bird 

6  devoured  it.  (6)  And  other  fell  upon  a  rock,  and 
sprung  up  forthwith  ;  but,  as  it  lacked  moisture,  it 

7  dried  up.  (7)  And  other  fell  among  thorns,  and 
the    thorns   sprung   up    with    it,   and   choked   it. 

8  (8)  And  other  fell  on  good  and  fair  ground,  and 
sprung  up,  and  bore  fruits,  a  hundred  for  one. 
Having  said  these  things,  he  cried :  He  that  hath 
ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear. 

9  And  his  disciples  asked  him :    what  meaneth 

10  this  similitude  ?  (10)  And  he  said  to  them :  To 
you  it  is  given,  to  know  the  mysteries*^  of  the 
kingdom  of  God ;  but  to  others,  it  is  spoken  in 
allegories  ;f  that,  while  seeing,  they  may  not  see, 

11  and  while  hearing,  may  not  understand.  (11)  But 
this  is  the  similitude:  The  seed  is  the  word  of 

12  God.  (12)  And  those  by  the  side  of  the  path,  are 
they  that  hear  the  word,  and  the  enemy?  cometh 
and  taketh  the  word  out  of  their  heart,  that  they 

13  may  not  believe  and  live.  (13)  And  those  upon 
the  rock,  are  they  who,  when  they  hear,  receive 
the  word  with  joy:  but  they  have  no  root  in 
them,  and  their  faith  is  temporary,  and  in  time  of 

14  temptation^  they  are   stumbled.     (14)    And  that 


•^  Sy.  ,_>^Q-. 
-=  Sy.  ^Q-» 
"^  or,  parables. 


Sy.  1Z]J-2l^ 


e  Sy. 


^  or,  trial. 


120 


LUKE,   VIII. 


or,  lusts. 


"  Sy.  ^5 


Sy.  \^y^. 


\ 


wbicli  fell  among  thorns,  are  those  who  hear  the 
word,  but  are  choked  bj  cares,  and  bj  riches,  and 
by  worldly  desires,*  and  bear  no  fruits.     (15)  And  15 
that    on   good    ground,    are   those   who,    with   a 
humble  and  good  heart,  hear  the  word,  and  retain 
it,  and  with  patience  bring  forth  fruits. — (16)  No  16 
one  liglitcth  a  lamp,  and  covereth  it  with  a  vessel, 
or  placeth  it  under  a  bed,  but  setteth  it  upon  a 
light-stand,  that  all  who  come  in,  may  see  the  light 
of  it.     (17)  For  there  is  nothing  covered,  that  shall  17 
not  be  uncovered;   nor  concealed,  that  shall  not 
be  known  and  become  manifest.     (18)  Take  heed  18 
how  ye  hear :  for  to  him  that  hath,  shall  be  given; 
and  from  him  that  hath  not,  shall  be  taken  even 
what  he  thinketh  he  hath. — (19)  And  his  mother  19 
and  his  brothers  came  to  him,  and  they  could  not 
speak  Avith  him,  because  of  the  multitude.     (20)  20 
And   they   say   to   him :    Thy   mother   and.  thy 
brothers   stand   without,    and   wish   to   see   thee. 
(21)  And  he  answered  and  said:  My  mother  and  21 
my  brothers,  are  they  who  hear  the  word  of  God, 
and  do  it. 

And  on  a  certain  day  Jesus  embarked  and  sat  22 
in  a  ship,  he  and  his  disciples.     And  he  said  to 
them;  Let  us  pass  over  to  the  other  side  of  the 
sea.     (23)  And  while  they  were  rowing,  Jesus  fell  23 
asleep.     And  there  was  a  tempest  of  wind  on  the 
sea;  and  the  ship  was  near  to  sinking.     (24)  And  24 
they  came  and  awaked   him,   and   said   to   him: 
Our  Rabbi,  our  Rabbi, ^  we  are  perishing !    And 
he  arose,  and  rebuked  the  winds  and  the  agita- 
tions  of  the  water ;    and  they  ceased,  and  there 
was  a  calm.     (25)  And  he  said  to  them:  Where  25 
is  your  faith  ?  And  they  being  in  awe,  wondered, 
and  said  one  to  another:    Who  is  this,  that  com- 
mandeth  even  the  winds,  and.  the  waves,  and  the 
sea;  and  they  obey  him? 

And  they  rowed  on,  and  came  to  the  country  of  26 
the  Gadarenes,!  which  lieth  over  against  Galilee. 
(27)  And  when  he  went  out  upon  the  land,  there  27 
met  him  a  man  of  the  city,  in  whom  had  been  a 
demon  for  a  loniij  time ;  and  he  wore  no  clothino^, 
and   did  not  reside  in  a  house,  but  among  the 
tombs.    1(28)  And  when  he  saw  Jesus,   he  cried  28 
out,  and  fell  down  before  him,  and  said,  with  a  loud 
voice :   What  have  we  to  do  with  thee?  Jesus,  thou 


LUKE,    VIII. 


121 


29 


30 


31 


.q9 


33 


Son  of  the  exalted  God.  I  entreat  of  thee,  torment 
me  not.  (29)  For  Jesus  had  commanded  the 
unclean  spirit,  to  come  out  of  the  man :  for,  of  a 
long  time  he  had  been  held  captive  by  him ;  and 
he  had  been  bound  with  chains,  and  held  in 
fetters ;  but  he  had  burst  the  bonds,  and  had  been 
driv^en  bj  the  demon  into  the  desert.  (30)  And 
Jesus  demanded  of  him :  What  is  thy  name  ? 
And  he  said  to  him :  Legion  i™  because  many 
demons  had  entered  into  him.  (31)  And  they 
besought  him,  not  to  command  them  to  depart 
into  the  abyss."  (32)  And  there  was  a  herd  of 
many  swine  grazing  on  the  mountain.  And  they 
besought  him,  that  he  would  permit  them  to  enter 
the  swine.  And  he  permitted  them.  (33)  And 
the  demons  went  out  of  the  man,  and  entered  the 
swine ;  and  the  whole  herd  ran  to  a  precipice, » 
and  plunged  into  the  sea,  and  were  strangled. 
(31)  And  when  the  herdmen  saw  what  had 
occurred,  they  fled,  and  told  [it]  in  the  cities  and 
the  viUages.  (35)  And  the  men  went  out  to  see 
Avhat  was  done.  And  they  came  to  Jesus,  and 
found  the  man,  out  of  whom  the  demons  had 
gone,  now  clothed,  and  modest,  and  sitting  at  the 
feet  of  Jesus ;  and  they  were  awed.  (36)  And 
they  that  saw  [it],  related  to  them  in  what  manner 
the  demoniac  was  cured.  (37)  And  the  whole 
throngp  of  the  Gadarenes  requested  him,  that 
he  would  depart  from  them:  for  great  fear  had 
seized  them.  And  Jesus  embarked  in  a  ship,  and 
retired  from  among  them.  (38)  And  the  man, 
from  Avhom  the  demons  had  gone  out,  requested 
that  he  might  remain  with  him.  But  Jesus  dis- 
missed him,  and  said  to  him :  (39)  Eeturn  to  thy 
home,  and  relate  what  God  hath  done  for  thee. 
And  he  went  away,  and  proclaimed  through  all 
the  city  what  Jesus  had  done  for  him. 

And  when  Jesus  returned,  a  great  multitude 
received  him;  for  all  were  looking  for  him. 
(11)  And  a  man,  whose  name  was  Jairus,""  a  chief 
of  the  sjaiagogae,^  fell  down  at  the  feet  of  Jesus, 
42  and  besought  him  to  enter  his  house;  (12)  for  he 
had  an  only'  daughter,  about  twelve  years  old, 
and  she  was  near  dying.  And  as  Jesus  went  with 
him,  a  great  multitude  pressed  upon  him 
(13)    And   a    certain   Avoman,    whose   blood   had 


35 


36 


37 


38 


39 


40 


11 


43 


■  Sy.  vCL..-^^ 

Sy.  "jioOCTlI 


or,  cliff. 


p  or,  multitude. 


Sy.  w-sjIoj 


Sy.    .  ti  .ij 

Sy. 


122 


LUKE,   IX. 


Gr. 


Peter. 


Sy.  ]]j 


y  Sy.  eyes. 


-  Sv. 

»  Sy. 


o  in  ,^5 


flowed  twelve  years,  and  who  had  expended  all 
her  property  among  physicians,  and  could  not  be 
cured  by  any  one,  (44)  came  up  behind  him,  and  44 
touched  the  border  of  his  garment;    and  imme- 
diately the  flow  of  her  blood  stopped.     (45)  And  45 
Jesus  said:    Who   touched  me?     And  when   all 
denied,  Simon  Cephas^  and  those  with  him  said 
to   him:    Our  Rabbi,^  crowds  press   upon  thee; 
and   say  est  thou.  Who  touched  me?     (46)  And  46 
he  said :  Some  one  touched  me ;  for  I  perceive, 
that  energy^  hath  gone  out  from  me.     (47)  And  47 
the  woman,  when  she  saw  that  she  had  not  escaped 
his  notice,  came  trembling,  and  fell  down  and  wor- 
shipped  him.     And  in  the  presencex  of  all  the 
people,  she  declared  for  what  cause  she  had  touched 
him,  and  that  she  was  instantly  healed.     (48)  And  48 
Jesus  said  to  her :  Take  courage,  my  daughter :    . 
Thy  faith  hath  given  thee  life:    Go  in  peace. — 
(49)     And  while   he   was    speaking,    one    came  49 
from  the  house  of  the  chief  of  the  sjmagogue,^ 
and  said  to  him :  Thy  daughter  is  dead ;  trouble 
not  the  teacher.!^     (50)  And  Jesus  heard  [it],  and  50 
said  to  the  father  of  the  maid :  Fear  not ;  believe 
only,  and  she  will  live.      (51)   And  Jesus   came  61 
to  the  house ;  and  he  suffered  none  to  go  in  with 
him,    except  Simon,    and  James,   and   John,  and 
the  father  and  mother  of  the  maid.     (52)  And  all  52 
were  weeping  and  wailing  over  her.     And  Jesus 
said :  Weep  not ;  for  she  is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth. 
(53)  And  they  derided  him,  knowing  that  she  was  53 
dead.     (54)  And  he  put  every  one  out,  and  took  54 
her  by  the  hand,  and  called,  and  said:  Maid,  arise. ^ 

(55)  And  her  spirif^  returned,  and  she  instantly  55 
arose.     And  he  directed  them  to  give  her  food. 

(56)  And  her  parents  were  astonished :    and  he  56 
charged  them  to  tell  no  one  what  had  occurred. 

And  Jesus  called  his  twelve,  and  gave  them  IX. 
power  and  authority  over  all  demons  and  diseases, 
to  heal  [them].     (2)  And  he  sent  them  forth,  to  pro-     2 
claim  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  to  heal  the  sick. 
(3)  And  he  said  to  them :  Take  nothing  for  the     3 
journey,   neither  a  staff,  nor  a  wallet,   nor  bread, 
nor  money ;    neither  have  two  tunics.     (4)   And    4 
into   whatever   house  ye   enter,    there   stay,    and 
thence  depart.     (5)  And  against  them  that  receive     5 


LUKE,    IX. 


123 


10 


11 


you  not,  when  ye  go  out  of  that  city,  shake  off 
even  the  dust  of  your  feet  against  them,  for  a  testi- 

6  mony,  (6)  And  the  Legates'*  went  forth,  and  trav- 
elled about  the  villages  and  cities,  and  preached 
and  healed  everywhere. 

7  And  Herod  the  Tetrarch  heard  of  all  the  things 
done  by  him,  and  heVas  disturbed;  because  some 

8  said,  that  John  had  arisen  from  the  dead.  (8)  But 
others  said,  that  Elijah  hath  appeared ;  and  others, 
that  a  prophet  from  among  the  ancient  prophets 

9  hath  arisen.  (9)  And  Herod  said:  The  head  of 
John,  I  have  cut  off";  but  who  is  this,  of  whom  I 
hear  these  things?  And  he  was  desirous  to  see 
him. 

And  when  the  Legates^  returned,  they  narrated 
to  Jesus  all  they  had  done.  And  he  took  them 
aside,  to  the  desert  part  of  Bethsaida.  (11)  And 
when  the  multitude  knew  [it],  they  followed  him: 
and  he  I'eceived  them,  and  conversed  with  them 
respecting  the  kingdom  of  God :  and  such  as  had 

12  need  of  healing,  he  healed.  (12)  And  when  the 
day  began  to  decline,  his  disciples  came  near,  and 
said  to  him :  Send  away  the  multitude,  that  they 
may  go  to  the  villages  around  us  and  to  the 
towns,  to  lodge  in  them,  and  to  procure  themselves 

13  food,  for  we  are  in  a  desert  place.  (13)  Jesus  said 
to  them :  Give  ye  them  to  eat.  And  they  say : 
We  have  no  more  than  five  loaves  and  two  fishes ; 
unless  we  go  and  bu}^  food   for  all  this  people: 

1-1  (14)  for  they  were  about  fi.ve  thousand  men.  Jesus 
said  to  them :  Make  them  recline  by  companies, 

15  fifty  persons  in  a  company.     (15)  And  the  disci- 

16  pies  did  so,  and  made  them  all  recline.  (16)  And 
Jesus  took  the  five  loaves  and  two  fishes,  and 
looked  towards  heaven,  and  blessed,  and  brake, 
and  gave  to  hLs  disciples  to  set  before  the  multi- 

17  tudes.  (17)  And  they  all  ate,  and  were  satisfied : 
and  they  took  up  the  fragments  of  remains,  twelve 
baskets.  •= 

18  And  as  he  Avas  praying  in  private  with  his  dis- 
ciples, he  asked  them,  and  said :  Who,  do  the  mul- 

19  titudes  say  of  me,  that  I  am?  (19)  They  answer 
and  say  to  him:  John  the  Baptizer;  others,  Elijah; 
and  others,  a  prophet,  one  of  the  ancient  prophets 

20  arisen.  (20)  He  said  to  them:  But  who,  do  ye 
say,  that  I  am  ?     Simon  answered,  and  said :  The 


or,  Apostles. 


^  or,  Apostles. 


Sy. 


1  ]  tg^Q-Q 


12-i 


LUKE,    IX. 


d  Sy. 


Id 


or,  every  one. 


Sy.  m  «.  <7M 


s  Sy.  m  «»  e^  ^ 


i"  or,  wu7-ds. 


'  Sv. 


Sy. 


Sy.  /tarZ  been. 


Messiali<J  of  God.     (21.)  And-he  chided  them,  and  21 
charged  them,  that  they  should  say  this  to  no  one. 

(22)  And  he  said  to  them :  The  Son  of  man  is  to  22 
sutfer  many  things,  and  to  be  rejected  by  the  Elders 
and  the  chief  priests  and  Scribes;  and  they  will 
kill  him;  and  on  the  third  day,  he  will  arise. — 

(23)  And  he  said  before  all  the  people :«  He  that  23 
would  follow  me,  must  deny  himself,  and  take  up 
his  cross  daily,  and  [so]  come  after  me.     (24)  For  24 
he  that  will  preserve  his  life,^  shall  lose  it;  but  he 
that  shall  lose  his  life,  for  my  sake,  will  preserve  it. 
(25)  For,  what  will  a  "man  be  profited,  if  he  gain  25 
the  whole  world,  and  lose  his  life§>  or  be  deprived 
[of  itj  ?     (26)  And  whoever  shall  be  ashamed  of  26 
me  and  of  my  words,  of  him  will  the  Son  of  man 

be  ashamed,  when  he  cometh  in  the  glory  of  his 
Father,  with  his  holy  angels. — (27)  I  tell  you  the  27 
truth,  that  there  are  some  standing  here,  who  will 
not  taste  death  until  they  shall  see  the  kingdom  of 
God. 

And  it  was  about  eight  days  after  these  dis-  23 
courses, h  that  Jesus  took  Simon  and  James  and 
John,  and  went  up  a  mountain  to  pray.     (29)  And  29 
while  he  prayed,  the  aspect  of  his  countenance  was 
changed, 'and  his  garments  became  white  and  bril- 
liant.    (30)  And  lo,  two  men  were  talking  with  30 
him:  and  they  were  Moses  and  Elijah,  (31)  who  31 
appeared  in  glory.'     And  they  were  conversing  on 
his  departure,  Avhich  was  to  be  consummated  at 
Jerusalem.     (32)  And  Simon  and  those  with  him  32 
were  oppressed  with  drowsiness ;  and  being  scarcely 
awake,  they  saw  his  glory, '^  and  those  two  men 
who  stood  near  him.     (33)  And  when  they  began  33 
to  retire  from  him,  Simon  said  to  Jesus:  Kabbi,  it 
is  delightful  for  us  to  be  here.  '  And  let  us  make 
here  three  booths,  one  for  thee,  and  one  for  Moses, 
and  one  for  Elijah.     But  he  knew  not  what  he 
said.    (34)  And  as  he  thus  spoke,  there  was  a  cloud ;  34 
and  it  overshadowed  them;  and  they  were  afraid, 
when  they  saw  Moses  and  Elijah  go  up  into  the 
cloud.     (35)  And  there  was  a  voice  from  the  cloud,  35 
which  said:  This  is  my  beloved  Son  ;  hear  ye  him. 
(36)  And  when  the  voice  had  passed,'  Jesus  was  36 
found  to  be  alone. — And  they  kept  silence,  and 
told  no  one  in  those  days  what  they  had  seen. 

And  the  next  day,  as  they  came  down  from  the  37 


LUKE,    IX. 

38  mountain,  a  great  multitude  met  them.  (38)  And 
a  man  from  the  throng  cried  out,  and  said : 
Teacher, "^  I  beseech  thee,  turn  thyself  to  me.    Here 

39  is  m}^  only"  son:  (39)  and  a  spirit  cometh  upon 
him,  and  he  suddenly  crieth  out,  and  gnasheth  his 
teeth,   and  foameth  ;  and  he  hardly  leaveth  him, 

40  when  he  hath  crushed  him.  (40)  And  I  requested 
thy  disciples  to  expel  him ;  and  they  could  not. 

41  (41)  And  Jesus  answered,  and  said :  0  the  unbe- 
lieving and  perverse  generation !  How  long  shall 
I  be  with  you,  and  bear  with  you  ? .    Bring  hither 

42  thy  son.  (42)  And  while  he  was  bringing  him, 
the  demon  threw  him  down,  and  convulsed  him. 
And  Jesus  rebuked  the  unclean  spirit,  and  healed 

43  the  lad,  and  delivered  him  to  his  father."  (43)  And 
they  were  all  amazed  at  the  majesty°  of  God. — 
And  while  every  one  admired  at  all  that  Jesus 

44  did,  he  said  to  his  disciples :  (44)  Lay  up  these 
w^ords  in  3^our  minds:?  for  the  Son  of  man  is  to 

45  be  delivered  into  the  hands  of  men,  (45)  But 
they  understood  not  that  speech  ;>■  because  it  was 
hidden  from  them,  that  they  should  not  know  it : 
and  they  feared  to  ask  him  concerning  that  speech. 

46  And  the  thought  arose  among  them,  which  of 

47  them  [was  to  be]  the  greatest.  (47)  And  Jesus 
knew  the  thought  of  their  heart :  and  he  took  a 

48  child,  and  placed  him  near  to  him ;  (48)  and  said 
to  them:  Whoever  receiveth  a  child  like  this,  in 
my  name,  receiveth  me ;  and  he  that  receiveth  me, 
receiveth  him  that  sent  me.  For  he  that  shall  be 
least  among  you  all,  he  will  be  the  great  one. — 

49  (49)  And  John  answered,  and  said:  Our  Eabbi, 
we  saw  a  man  casting  out  demons  in  thy  name; 
and  we  forbad  him,  because  he  doth  not,  with  us, 

50  follow  thee.  (50)  Jesus  said  to  them :  Forbid  not : 
for,  Avhoever  is  not  against  you,  is  for  you. 

51  And  when  the  days  for  his  ascension  were  com- 
pleted, so  it  was,  that  he  set  his  face  to  go  up  to 

52  Jerusalem.  (52)  And  he  sent  messengers  before 
his  face ;  and  they  went,  and  entered  a  village  of 
the   Samaritans,    to   prepare   [lodgings]    for  him. 

53  (53)  And  they  received  him  not,  because  he  had 

54  set  his  face  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem.  (54)  And 
when  his  disciples  James  and  John  saw  [it],  they 
said  to  him :  Our  Lord,  wilt  thou  that  we  speak, 
and  fire  come  down  from  heaven,  and  consume 


125 


Sy 


p  Sy.  ears. 
'  or,  word. 


Sy.  lA^^U 

Sy. 
CLiL-»,KkLl 


Sy.  sons  of  my 
house. 


Sy. 


lit.  your  peace. 


tliem,   as  also  did  Elijah?     (55)  And  he  turned,  55 
and  rebuked  them,  and  said :  Ye  know  not  of  what 
spirit  ye  are.     (56)  For  the  Son  of  man  hath  not  56 
come  to  destroy  souls ;«  but  to  quicken'  [them]. 
And  they  went  to  another  village. 

And  as  they  went  by  the  wa}'-,  one  said  to  him :  57 
I  will  follow  thee  to  whatever  place  thou  goest, 
my   Lord.     (58)   Jesus   said   to   him :  The   foxes  58 
have  holes,  and  the  birds  of  heaven  have  coverts ; 
but  the  Son  of  man  hath  not  where  he  may  lay  his 
head.     (59)  And  he  said  to  another :  Come  thou  59 
after  me.     And  he  said  to  him :  My  Lord,  permit 
me  first  to   go   and  bury  my  father.     (60)  And  60 
Jesus  said  to  him:  Allow  the  dead  to  bury  their 
dead;  and  go  thou  and  proclaim  the  kingdom  of 
God.     (61)   Another  said  to  him:    I  will  follow  61 
thee,  my  Lord ;  but  allow  me  first  to  bid  adieu  to 
my  household,  V  and  I  will  come.     (62)  Jesus  said  62 
to  him :  No  man  putting  his  hand  to  the  ox-plough, 
and  looking  backward,  is  fit  for  the  kingdom  of 
God. 


And   after  these  things,  Jesus  separated  from  X, 
among  his  disciples  seventy  other  persons,  and  sent 
them,  two  and  two,  before  his  face,  to  every  place 
and  city  whither  he  was  to  go.     (2)  And  he  said     2 
to  them:  The  harvest  is  great,  and  the  laborers 
few :  pray  ye,  therefore,  the  lord  of  the  harvest, 
that    he   would  send  laborers    into    his   harvest. 
(3)  Go  ye :  lo,  I  send  you  forth,  as  sheep  among 
wolves.     (4)  Take,  to  you  no  purses,  nor  wallets, 
nor  shoes ;  and  salute  no  man  by  the  way.    (5)  And 
into  whatever  house  ye  enter,  first  say :  Peace  be 
to  this  house.     (6)  And  if  the  son  of  peace  is  there, 
your  salutation^  will  rest  upon  it ;  but  if  not,  your 
salutation  will  return  to  you.     (7)  And  remain  in     7 
that  house,  eating  and  drinking  of  what  it  atfords  ; 
for  the  laborer  is  worthy  of  his  hire.     And  pass 
not  from  house  to  house.     (8)  And  into  whatever     8 
city  ye  enter,  and  they  receive  you  ;  eat  that  which 
is  set  before  you.    (9)  And  heal  them  that  are  sick     9 
in  it ;  and  say  to  them :  The  kingdom  of  God  hath 
come  near  you.     (10)  And  into  whatever  city  ye  10 


enter,  and  they  receive  you  not;  go  out  into  the 
street,  and  say:  (11)  Even  the  dust  of  your  city  11 
which  adhcrcth  to  our  feet,  we  shake  oil*  against 


LUKE,    X. 


127 


you :  but  this  know  ye,  that  the  kingdom  of  God 

12  hath  come  near  to  you,  (12)  I  say  to  you,  that  for 
Sodom  there  will  be  comfort  in  that  day,  rather 

13  than  for  that  city.  (13)  Woe  to  thee,  Chorazin; 
woe  to  thee,  Bethsaida ;  for  if  in  Tyre  and  Sidon 
there  had  been  the  mighty  deeds,  that  were  in  you, 
they  would  long  ago  have  repented  in  sackcloth 

11  and  ashes.  (11)  But  for  Tjn-e  and  Sidon  there  will 
be  comfort  in  the  day  of  judgment,  rather  than  for 

15  you.  (15)  And  thou  Capernaum,  that  art  lifted 
up  to  heaven,  shalt  be  brought  down  to  hell.b — 

16  (16)  He  that  heareth  you,  heareth  me ;  and  he  that 
despiseth  you,  despiseth  me ;  and  he  that  despiseth 
me,  despiseth  him  that  sent  me. 

17  And  the  seventy  whom  he  sent  forth,  returned 
with  great  joy,  and  say  to  him :  Our  Lord,  even  the 

18  demons  were  subject  to  us,  in  thy  name.  (18)  And 
he  said  to  them :  I  saw  Satau<=  fall,  like  the  light- 

19  niug  from  heaven.  (19)  Behold,  I  give  you  author- 
ity to  tread  on  serpents,  and  scorpions,  and  on  all 
the  power^i  of  the  adversary  :<=  and  nothing  shall 

20  harm  you.  (20)  Yet  rejoice  not  in  this,  that  the 
demons  are  subject  to  you ;  but  rejoice,  that  your 

21  names  are  written  in  heaven. — (21)  In  that  hour 
Jesus  exulted  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  said  :  I  thank 
thee,  my  Father,  thou  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth, 
that  thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise  and 
intelligent,  and  hast  revealed  them  to  babes:  yes, 

22  my  Father,  for  such  was  thy  good  pleasure.  (22) 
And  he  turned  himself  to  his  disciples,  and  said  to 
them:  -Every  thing  is  committed  to  me  by  my 
Father :  and  no  one  knoweth  who  the  Son  is,  but 
the  Father ;  or  who  the  Father  is,  but  the  Son,  and 
he  to  whom  the  Son  is  pleased  to  reveal  [him]. 

23  (23)  And  he  turned  to  his  disciples,  privately,  and 
said:  Blessed  are  the  eyes  that  see,  what  ye  see. 

21  (21)  For  I  say  to  you,  that  many  prophets  and 
kings  desired  to  see  what  ye  see,  and  did  not  see 
[it]  ;  and  to  hear  what  ye  hear,  and  did  not  hear 
[it]. 

25  And  behold,  a  Scribe  stood  up  to  try  him,  and 
said  :  Teacher, f  what  must  I  do,  to  inherit  eternal 

26  life  ?     (26)   And  Jesus  said  to  him :    How  is  it 

27  Avritten  in  the  law  ?s  How  readest  thou?  (27)  He 
answered  and  said  to  him :  Thou  shalt  love  the 
Lord  thy  God,  with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy 


Sy.  ^Q_k_» 


Sy.  "^40: 
Sy.  (TlNi  Kj 


^Sy.]lc^\V^ 

e  Sy. 


128 


LUKE,    XI. 


intellect. 


'  Sy.  1A^ 
>=  Sy.  )>CL.-^ 


soul,  and  with  all  thy  might,   and  with  all  thy 
mind;h  and  thy  neighbor,  as  thj^self.     (28)  Jesus  28 
said  to  him :  Thou  hast  said  correctly ;  do  thus,  and 
thou  wilt  live.     (29)    And  he,  being  disjDOsed  to  29 
justif}'-  himself,  said:  And  who  is  my  neighbor? 

(30)  Jesus  said  to  him :  A  certain  man  was  going  30 
down  from  Jerusalem  to  Jericho,  and  robbers  feU 
upon  him,  and  plundered  him,  and  smote  him,  and 
left  him  with  little  life  in  him,  and  went  their  way. 

(31)  And  a  certain  priest  went  down  by  that  way ;  31 
and  he  saw  him,  and  passed  on.     (32)  So  also  a  32 
Levite  came,  apj3roached  the  spot,  and  saw  him, 
and  passed  on.     (33)  But  a  Samaritan,  as  he  trav-  33 
elled,  came  where  he  was,  and  saw  him,  and  took 
pity  on  him,  (3-1)  and  went  to  him,  and  bound  up  31 
his  wounds,  and  poured  wine  and  oil  on  them,  and 
placed  him  upon  his  ass,  and  brought  him  to  the 
inn,  and  took  care  of  him.    (35)  And  on  the  morn-  35 
ing  of  the  [next]  day,  he  took  out  two  denarii  and 
gave  to  the  host,  and  said  :    Take  good  care  of 
him ;  and  if  thou  expendest  any  more,  when  I  re- 
turn, I  will  repay  thee.     (36)  Which  therefore  of  36 
these  three,  appears  to  thee,  to  have  been  neigh- 
bor to  him  that  fell  into  the  hands  of  marauders  ? 
(37)  And  he  said:  He  that  had  pity  on  him.   Jesus  37 
said  to  him :  Go,  and  do  thou  also  the  like. 

And  it  occurred,  as  they  travelled  by  the  way,  38 
that  he  entered  a  certain  village,  and  a  woman 
whose  name  was  Martha,'   received   him  at  her 
house.     (39)  And  she  had  a  sister  whose  name  39 
was  Mary  :^  and  she  came  and  seated  herself  at  the 
feet  of  our  Lord,  and  listened   to  his  discourses. 
(40)  But  Martha  was  occupied  with  much  service  ;  10 
and  she  came,  and  said  to  him :  My  Lord,  hast  thou 
no  concern,  that  rny  sister  hath  left  me  to  serve 
alone  ?     Bid  her  assist  me.     (11)   Jesus  answered,  41 
and  said  to  her :  Martha,  Martha,  thou  art  anxious 
and   troubled   about  many   things:    (42)  yet  but  42 
one  thing  is  necessary ;  and  Mary  hath  chosen  for 
herself  the  good  part,  which  shall  not  be  taken 
from  her. 

And  as  he  was  praying  in  a  certain  place,  it  XI. 
occurred,  that  when  he  ceiiscd,  one  of  his  disciples 
said  to  liim  :  Our  Lord,  teach  us  to  pray,  as  John 
also  taught  his  disciples.     (2)  Jesus  said  to  them :     2 


LUKE,   XL 


129 


When  ye  pray,  thus  speak  ye :  Our  Father  who 
art  in  heaven,  hallowed  be  thy  name;  thy  king- 
dom come  ;  thy  pleasure  be  done,  as  in  heaven,  so 
8  on  earth;  (3)  give  us  daily  the  bread  we  need; 

4  (4)  and  remit  to  us  our  sins,  for  we  also  remit  to  all 
that  are  indebted  to  us;    and  bring  us  not  into 

5  -trials,  but  deliver  us  from  evil. — (5)  And  he  said 
to  them :  Which  of  you  shall  have  a  friend,  that 
shall  come  to  him  at  midnight  and  say  to  him.  My 

6  friend,  lend  me  three  cakes;  (6)  for  a  friend  hath 
come  to  me  from  a  journey,  and  I  have  nothing  to 

7  set  before  him  ?  (7)  And  his  friend  within  shall 
answer,  and  say  to  him :  Do  not  disturb  me,  for  lo, 
the  door  is  closed,  and  my  children  Avith  me  in 

8  bed ;  I  cannot  rise  and  give  thee.  (8)  I  say  to  you : 
If  he  give  him  not,  on  account  of  friendship,  yet 
on  account  of  [his]  importunity,  he  will  arise  and 

9  give  [him]  as  much  as  he  asketh.  (9)  I  say  also 
to  you :  Ask,  and  it  will  be  given  you ;  seek,  and 
ye  will  find ;  knock,  and  it  will  be  opened  to  you. 

10  (10)  For  every  one  that  asketh,  receiveth;  and  he 
that  seeketh,  findeth;   and  to  him  that  knocketh, 

11  it  is  opened.  (11)  For  which  of  you  being  a  father, 
if  his  son  shall  ask  him  for  bread,  will  he  reach  to 
him  a  stone?     Or,  if  he  ask  of  him  a  fish,  will  he, 

12  instead  of  a  fish,  reach  to  him  a  serpent?  (12)  Or, 
if  he  ask  of  him  an  egg^  will  he  reach  to  him  a 

13  scorpion  ?  (13)  And  if  ye,  who  are  evil,  know 
how  to  give  good  gifts  to  your  children,  how  much 
more  will  your  Father  from  heaven  give  the  Hol}^ 
Spirit  to  them  that  ask  him  ? 

14  And  as  he  was  casting  out  a  demon  that  was 
dumb,  it  occurred,  that  when  the  demon  had  gone 
out,  the  dumb  [man]  conversed:    and  the  multi- 

15  tudes  admired.  (15)  But  some  of  them  said :  It  is 
by  Beelzebub,^  the  prince  of  demons,^  that  he  cast- 

16  eth  out  demons.     (16)  And  others,  to  tempt  him, 

17  asked  of  him  a  sign  from  heaven.  (17)  But  Jesus, 
as  he  knew  their  thoughts,  said  to  them:  Every 
kingdom  that  is  divided  against  itself,  will  become 
a  desolation :  and  a  house  that  is  divided  against 

18  itself,  will  fall.  (18)  And  if  Satan  be  divided 
against  himself,  how  will  his  kingdom  stand  ?  since 
ye   say,   that   I  by  Beelzebub  cast  out  demons. 

19  (19)  And  if  I,  by  Beelzebub,  cast  out  demons,  by 
whom  do  your  sons  cast  [them]  out?     Therefore 


Sy, 

Sy.    ^_ 


130 


LUKE,    XI. 


Sy.  e.ntry,  hall. 


">  Sy.  scatlereth 
to  scalier. 


Sy.  ]  1  vn  .Z 


or,  /a?i(/. 


p  Sy.  ]^«  «  g^ 


will  they  be  to  jou  judges.     (20)  But  if  I,  by  the  20 
finger  of  God,  cast  out  demons,  the  kingdom  of 
God  hath  come  near  to  you.     (21)    When  a  strong  21 
man   armed    kecpeth   his  doorway,c  his  property 
rests  securely.    (22)  But  if  a  stronger  than  he  come  22 
and  overpower  him,  he  taketh  away  all  his  arms 
on  which  he  relied,  and  divideth  the  spoil  of  him. 
(23)  lie  that  is  not  for  me^  is  against  me;  and  he  23 
that  gathereth  not  with  me,  actually  scattereth.'^ — 
(2-1)  An  unclean  spirit,  when  he  goeth  out  of  a  24 
man,  goeth  wandering  in  places  where  no  water  is, 
in  order  to  find  rest ;  and,  as  he  cannot  find  [it], 
he   saith:    I  will  return  to  my  habitation,  from 
which  I  came.      (25)   And  when  he  cometh,  he  25 
findeth  it  swept  clean  and  set  in  order,     (26)  Then  26 
he  goeth  and  taketh  seven  other  spirits,  worse  than 
himself,  and  they  enter  in  and  dwell  there ;  and 
the  last  state  of  that  man  is  worse  than  the  first. — 
(27)  And  while  he  was  saying  these  things,  a  cer-  27 
tain  woman  from  the  crowd,  lifted  up  her  voice, 
and  said  to  him :  Blessed  is  the  womb  that  carried 
thee,  and  the  breasts  that  nursed  thee.     (28)  He  28 
said  to  her :  Blessed  are  they  Avho  hear  the  word 
of  God,  and  keep  it. — (29)  And  when  multitudes  29 
were  assembled,  he  began  to  say  :  This  evil  genera- 
tion seeketh  a  sign  ;  and  no  sign  will  bo  given  it, 
but  the  sign  of  Jonah  the  prophet.     (30)  For  as  30 
Jonah  was  a  sign  to  the  Ninevitcs,  so  also  will  the 
Son  of  man  be  a  sign  to  this  generation.    (31)  The  31 
queen  of  the  south^  will  stand  up  in  the  judgment 
with  the  men  of  this  generation,  and  will  condemn 
them;   for  she  came  from  the  other  side  of  the 
earth,'' to  hear  the  wisdom  of  Solomon,  and  lo,  one 
superior  to  Solomon  is  here.     (32)  The  men  of  32 
Nineveh  will  stand  up  in  the  judgment  with  this 
generation,  and  will  condemn  it;  for  they  repented 
at  the  preaching  of  Jonah,  and  lo,  one  superior  to 
Jonah  is  here. — (33)  No  one  lighteth  a  lamp,  and  33 
putteth  it  in  a  secret  place,  or  under  a  bushel,  but 
upon  a  light-stand ;  that  they  who  come  in,  may 
see  its  light.     (34)  The  lamp  of  thy  body  is  thy  3-1 
eye.      Therefore,   when   thy   eye   is   sound, s   thy 
whole  body  will  be  enlightened  ;  but  if  it  be  bad, 
thy  body  also  will  be  dark.     (35)  See  to  it,  there-  35 
fore,  lest  the  light  that  is  in  tliec,  be  darkness. 
(36)  For  if  thy  whole  body  be  enlightened,  and  no  36 


LUKE,    XI. 


131 


part  in  it  be  dark,  the  whole  will  be  luminous,  as 

if  a  lamp  enlightened  thee  by  its  radiance. 

87       And  while  he  was  speaking,  a  certain  Pharisee 

requested  him  to  dine  with  him :  and  he  went  in, 

38  and  reclined.  (38)  And  the  Pharisee  noticing  him, 
wondered  that  he  did  not  previously  baptize''  before 

39  dinner.  (39)  And  Jesus  said  to  him:  Now  ye 
Pharisees  make  clean  the  exterior  of  the  cup  and 
the  dish ;  but  your  interior  is  full  of  extortion  and 

40  wickedness.  (40)  Ye  deficient  in  understanding! 
did  not  he  who  made  the  exterior,  make  also  the 

41  interior?  (41)  But,  give  ye  alms  from  what  ye 
possess ;  and  lo,  every  thing  will  be  clean  to  you. 

42  (42)  But  woe  to  you,  Pharisees  !  for  ye  tithe  mint 
and  rue,  and  every  pot-herb ;  but  pass  over  justice' 
and  the  love  of  God.     Now  ye  ought  to  do  these 

43  things,  and  not  to  omit  those.  (43)  Woe  to  you, 
Pharisees!  who  love  the  chief  seats  in  the  syna- 

44  gogues,  and  a  salutation  in  the  streets.  (44)  Woe 
to  you.  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites!  for  ye 
are  like  graves  that  are  unknown,  and  men  walk 

45  over  them  and  do  not  know  [it].  (45)  And  one  of 
the  Scribes  replied,  and  said  to  him:  Teacher,'' 
while  saying  these  things,  thou  reproachest  us  also. 

46  (46)  And  he  said :  Woe  to  you  also !  ye  Scribes, 
who  lade  men  with  heavy  burdens ;  yet  yc  your- 
selves will  not  touch  those  burdens  with  one  of 

47  your  fingers,  (47)  Woe  to  you!  who  build  the 
sepulchres   of  the  prophets,  whom  your  fathers 

48  slew.  (48)  Thus  ye  testify,  that  ye  acquiesce  in 
the  deeds  of  your  fathers ;  for  they  slew  them,  and 

49  ye  build  their  sepulchres.  (49)  Therefore  hath  wis- 
dom said :  Lo,  I  will  send  to  them  prophets  and 
legates  ;i  and  some  of  them  they  will  persecute  and 

50  slay ;  (50)  that  from  this  generation  may  be  re- 
quired, the  blood  of  all  the  prophets,  which  hath 

51  been  shed  since  the  world  Avas  created  ;  (51)  from 
the  blood  of  Abel,  to  the  blood  of  Zachariah  who 
was  slain  between  the  temple  and  the  altar.  Yea, 
say  I  to  you :  It  will  be  required  of  this  generation. 

52  (52)  Woe  to  you.  Scribes  ;  for  ye  have  taken  away 
the  keys  of  knowledge  :  ye  yourselves  enter  not, 

53  and  them  that  are  entering  ye  hinder. — (53)  And 
when  he  had  said  these  things  to  them,  the  Scribes 
and  Pharisees  began  to  be  offended,  and  became 

54  angry,  and  carped  at  his  discourses,  (54)  and  prac- 


Sy.^<n\ 


Sy.U^j 


'^Ry.]l<^\Vr^ 


Sj-   (-»>>.  l\  9 


132 


Sy.  mouth. 


Sy.  ears. 


Sy.jjCTL^ 

^=  ^  of  a  de- 
narius. 


<"  or,  blaspheme. 


Sy-U^ 

or,  parable. 


LUKE,    XII. 

tiscd  many  wiles  upon  bira,  seeking  to  catcli  some- 
thing from  liis  lips,'"  that  they  might  accuse  him. 

And  when  great  multitudes  were  assembled  by  XII. 
myriads,  so  that  they  trod  one  upon  another,  Jesus 
began  to  say  to  his  disciples :    First  of  all,  beware 
for  yourselves   of  that  leaven   of  the  Pharisees, 
which   is   hypocrisy.      (2)    For   there    is   nothing     2 
hidden,  which  will  not  be  revealed ;  nor  concealed, 
that  will  not  be   known,     (3)   For  whatever  ye     3 
speak  in  the  dark,  will  be  heard  in  the  light ;  and 
what  in  secret  chambers,  ye  whisper  in  the  ear,a 
will  be  proclaimed  on  the  house-tops.     (4)   And  to     4 
3^ou,  my  friends,  I  say  :  Be  not  afraid  of  them  that 
kill  the  body,  and  afterwards  have  nothing  more 
they  can  do.     (5)  But  I  will  show  you,  of  vvdiom     5 
to  be  afraid  :    of  him  who,   after  he  hath  killed, 
hath  authority  to  cast  into  hell.''     Yea,  say  I  to 
you:  be  afraid  of  him.     (6)  Are  not  five  sparrows     6 
sold  for  two   assarii  ?«    and  not    one  of  them  is 
forgotten  before  God.     (7)  And  as  for  you,  the     7 
very  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbered.     Fear 
not,  therefore ;  for  ye  are  superior  to  many  sparrows. 
(8)  And  I  say  to  you,  that  every  one  that  shall     8 
confess  me  before  men,  the  Son  of  man  will  also 
confess  him  before  the  angels  of  God.     (9)  But  he     9 
that  shall  deny  me  before  men,  shall  himself  be 
denied  before  the  angels  of  God.     (10)  And  every  10 
one  that  shall  speak  a  word  against  the  Son  of 
man,  it  shall  be  forgiven  him :    but  he  that  shall 
reproach •!  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  Avill  not  be  forgiven 
him.     (11)  And  when  they  shall  bring  you  into  11 
the  synagogues,  before  chiefs  and  men  in  authority, 
be  not  anxious  how  ye  shall  make  defence,  or  what 
ye  shall  say;  (12)  for  the  Holy  Spirit  will,  in  that  12 
hour,  instruct  you  what  to  say. 

And  one  of  the  assembly  said  to  him :'  Teacher,  13 
tell  my  brother,  to  divide  the  inheritance  with  me. 
(14)  But  Jesus  said  to  him  :  Man,  who  established  14 
me  a  judge  and  distributor  over  you?    (15)  And  15 
he  said  to  his  disciples :  Beware  of  all  avarice,  for 
lifce  consisteth  not  in  abundance  of  riches.     (16)  16 
And  he  spoke  to  them  a  similitude  :'"  Thq  land  of 
a   certain  rich   man    brought    forth    produce   in 
abundance.     (17)  And  he  considered  with  himself,   17 
and  said :  What  shall  I  do  ;  for  I  have  not  where 


18  I  can  store  up  my  produce  ?  (18)  And  he  said : 
This  will  I  do  ;  I  will  pull  down  my  storehouses, 
and  build  them  larger ;  and  there  will  I  store  up 

19  all  my  corn  and  my  good  things  :  (19)  and  I  will 
say  to  my  soul :  My  soul,s  thou  hast  good  things 
in  abundance,  which  are  stored  up  for  many  years ; 
take  thy  ease;    eat,   drink,   and  live  in  ])lcasurc. 

20  (20)  But  God  said  to  him:  Thou  void  of  I'eason ! 
This  night,  thy  soul  will  be  required  of  thee  ;  and 
to   whom   will  belong  these  things  provided  by 

21  thee?  (21)  Such  is  he  that  layeth  up  treasures  for 
himself,  and  is  not  I'ich  in  God. 

22  And  he  said  to  his  disciples :  Therefore  I  tell 


28 


29 


30 


31 


,'hat 


you,  He  not  anxious  tor  your  iiie,"  Avnat  j-e  shall 
eat;  nor  for  your  body,  what  ye  shall  put  on. 
23  (23)  For  the  life'  is  more  important  than  food,  and 
2-1  the  body  than  raiment.  (21)  Consider  the  ravens, 
which  sow  not,  nor  reap,  nor  have  cellars  and  store- 
houses ;  yet  God  provideth  them  food.  How 
much  more  important  now  are  ye,  than  the  bii-ds  ! 

25  (25)  And  which  of  you,  by  taking  pains,  can  add 

26  one  cubit  to  his  stature  ?  (26)  And  if  ye  are  im- 
potent for  that  which  is  least,  why  arc  ye  anxious 

27  about  the  rest?  (27)  Consider  the  lilies,  how  they 
grow  :  they  toil  not,  nor  do  they  spin.  Yet  I  say 
to  you,  that  not  even  Solomon  in  all  his  glory, 
was  clothed  like  one  of  these.  (28)  And  if  God 
so  clothe  the  herb,  which  to-day  exists  in  the 
field,  and  to-morrow  falls  into  the  oven,  how  much 
more  you,  ye  little  in  faith?  (29)  And  inquire  not, 
what  ye  shall  eat,  or  what  ye  sl^all  drink;  nor  let 
3^our  mind  wander  upon  these  things.  (30)  For 
all  these  things  the  people  of  the  world  seek  after; 
and  your  father  knowcth  that,  for  you  also,  these 
things  are  needful.  (31)  But  seek  ye  the  kingdom 
of  God,  and  all  these  things  will  be  added  to  you. 

32  (32)  Fear  not,  little  flock; "for  your  Father  is  dis- 

33  posed  to  give  you  the  kingdom.  (33)  Sell  your 
property,  and  give  alms:  make  for  yourselves 
laags  that  do  not  become  old,  and  a  treasure  that 
is  not  transient,  in  the  heavens ;    where  no  thief 

34  approacheth,  and  no  moth  eateth.  (31)  For 
where  your  treasure  is,  there  also  will  your  heart 

35  be.      (35)   Let  your   loins  be  girded,    and   your 

36  lamps  burning.  (36)  And  be  ye  like  persons  who 
are  waiting  for  their  lord,  when  he  shall  return 


s  Sy.  .i^B„<^j 


Sy. 

Sy.  ]  «.  <7M 


^n*.  g^V 


131 


LUKE,    XII. 


»  Gr.  PeWr. 


"  Sy.  iQ  Cfisl. 


from  the  house  of  feasting,  that,  when  he  shall 
come  and  knock,  they  may  open  to  him  immedi- 
ately.     (37)    Happy   are   those   servants,    whom  37 
their  lord,  when  he  cometh,  shall  find  so  doin^r. 
Verily  I  say  to  you:    He  will  gird  his  loins,  and 
make  them  recline,  and  will  pass  around  and  serve 
them.     (38)  And  if  in  the  second  watch,  or  in  the  38 
third,  he  shall  come  and  so  find  [tliem],  happy  are 
those  servants.     (39)  And  this  know  ye,  that  if  39 
the  lord  of  the  house  had  known  at  what  watch 
the  thief  would  come,  he  would  have  been  awake, 
and  would   not  have   suffered   his   house   to   be 
broken   into.     (40)  Therefore  be  ye  also  ready ;  40 
for  at  an  hour  tliat  ye  think  not,  the  Son  of  man 
cometh.     (41)  Simon  Cephas'^  saith  to  him:   Our  41 
Lord,  speakest  thou  this  similitude  to  us,  or  also  to 
all  men  ?  (42)  Jesus  said  to  him :  Who  then  is  42 
that  faithful  and  wise  steward,  whom  his  lord  will 
place  over  all  his  domestics,  to  give  them  their 
portion  in  due  time  ?  (43)  Happy  is  that  servant  43 
whom  his  lord,   when   he   cometh,   shall   find  so 
doing.     (44)  Verily  I  say  to  you:    He  will  place  44 
him  over  all   his  possessions.      (45)    But  if  that  45 
servant  shall  say ,  in  his  heart,  My  lord  delaycth 
his  coming;  and  shall  begin  to  smite  the  servants 
and  the  maidens  of  his  lord;  and  shall  begin  to 
eat  and  to  drink  and  be  drunk ;  (46)  the  lord  of  46 
that  servant  will  come  in  a  day  he  thinketh  not, 
and  in  an  hour  he  knoweth  not,  and  will  cut  him 
in  two;  and  will  assign  him  his  portion  with  them 
that  are  unfaithful.     (47)    And   the  servant  that  47 
knew  his  lord's  pleasure,  and  did  not  prepare  f  )r 
him  according  to  his  pleasure,  shall  be  beaten  with 
many   [stripes].     (48)  But  he  that  knew  not,  yet  48 
did  that  which  deserved  stripes,  shall  be  beaten 
with  few  stripes.     For  to  whomsoever  much   is 
given,  from  him  will   mucli   be  required;  and  to 
whom    much    is   ciMnniitted,    the    more   will    be 
required  at  his  liand. — (49)     I  have  come  to  cast  49 
fire  on  the  earth  ;  and  I  would,  that  it  already 
burned.     (50)  And  I  have  a  baptism^  to  be  bap-  50 
tizcd"'  witli ;  and  I  am  much  {)rossed  until  it  be 
accomplished.     (51)  Suppose  ye,  that  I  have  come  51 
to  produce"  tranquillity  on  the  earth?   I  tell  you, 
No:  but  division.     (52)  P'or  from  this  time,  there  52 
will  be  five  [persons]  in  one  house,  who  will  be 


LUKE,    XIII. 


135 


divided,  three  against  two,  and  two  against  three. 

53  (53)  For  a  father  will  be  divided  against  his  son, 
and  a  son  against  his  father;  a  mother  against  her 
daughter,  and  a  daughter  against  her  mother;  a 
mother-in-law  against  her  daughter-in-law,  and  a 
daughter-in-law  against  her  mother-in-law. 

54  And  he  said  to  the  multitudes  :  When  you  see 
a  cloud  rising  out  of  the  west,  ye  at  once  say : 

55  Rain  is  coming ;  and  it  is  so.  (55)  And  when  a 
south  wind  bloweth,  ye  say:  It  will  be  hot:    and 

56  it  is  so.  {o6)  Ye  hypocrites,  ye  know  how  to 
distinguish  the  aspect  of  the  heavens  and  the 
earth ;  and  why  can  ye  not  distinguish  the  present 

57  time  ?  (57)  And  why  do  ye  not,  of  yourselves, 

58  judge  correctly ?o — (58)  And  when  thou  goest 
with  thy  adversary?  to  the  ruler, ■■  while  on  the 
way,  make  effort  to  be  released  by  him ;  lest  he 
bring  thee  to  the  judge,  and  the  judge  deliver  thee 
to   the   exactor,  and   the   exactor   cast  thee  into 

59  prison.  (59)  For  verily  I  say  to  thee :  Thou  wilt 
not  come  out  thence,  until  thou  pay  the  last  mite.^ 

XIIT.     And  at  that  time,  some  came  and  told  him  of 

those  Galileans,  whose  blood  Pilate  had  mingled 

2"  with  their  sacrifices.     (2)  And  Jesus  replied,  and 

said  to  them :    Suppose  ye,  that  these  Galileans 

were  sinners  beyond  all  the  Galileans,  because  this 

3  occurred  to  them  ?  (3)  No.  And  I  say  to  you. 
That  all  of  you  also,  unless  ye  repent,  will  likewise 

4  perish.  (4)  Or  those  eighteen,  on  whom  the  tower 
in  Siloam^  fell,  and  slew  them,  suppose  ye,  that 
they  were  sinners  beyond  all  the  men  inhabiting 

5  Jerusalem  ?  (5)  No.  And  I  say  to  you.  That  ex- 
cept ye  repent,  ye  like  them  will  all  of  you  perish. 

6  — (6)  And  he  spoke  this  similitude  :  A  man  had  a 
fig-tree  that  was  planted  in  his  vineyard :  and  he 
came,    seeking   fruits   upon   it,    and  found  none. 

7  (7)  And  he  said  to  the  cultivator :  Lo,  these  three 
years,  I  have  come  seeking  fruits  on  this  fig-tree, 
and  I  find  none.     Cut  it  down:  why  should   it 

8  cumber  the  ground?  (8)  The  cultivator  said  to 
him :  My  Lord,  spare  it  this  year  also,  until  I  shall 

9  work  about  it,  and  manure  it.  (9)  And  if  it  bear 
fruits,  [well ;]  and  if  not,  thou  wilt  cut  it  down : 
why  should  it  live? 

10       And  when  Jesus  was  teaching  in  one  of  the 


"  S}'.  truth. 

p  or,  prosecutor. 

'  Sy.  XlOD'y] 

'  Sy.  ]jq1q_» 


Sy. 

]-KtO\l>    » 


136 


Sy.  j:i5 


•=  Sy.  to  drink. 
«>  Sy. 


Sy. 


'Sy.     "Itd 


Sy.  _.U»i 


LUKE,    XIII. 

synagogues,  on  the  sabbath,  (11)  a  woman  was  there,  11 
who  had  had  a  spirit  of  infirmity  eighteen  years; 
and  she  was  bent  over,  and  could  not  straighten 
herself  at  all.     (12)  And  Jesus  saw  her,  and  called  12 
her,  and  said  to  her:   Woman,  thou  art  released 
from  thy  infirmity.     (13)  And  he  put  his  hand  13 
upon  her ;  and  immediately  she  straightened  her- 
self up,  and  glorified  God.     (l-l)  And  the  chief'  of  H 
the  synagogue,  being  angry  that  Jesus  had  healed 
on  the  sabbath,  answered,  and  said  to  the  multi- 
tude :  There  are  six  days,  on  which  it  is  lawful  to 
work ;  on  them  come  ye,  and  be  healed,  and  not 
on  the  sabbath  day.     (15)  But  Jesus  replied,  and  15 
said  to  him :  Thou  h^^pocrite !  Doth  not  every  one 
of  you,  on  the  sabbath,  loose  his  ox  or  his  ass  from 
the  stall,  and  lead  him  to  water?"     (16)  And  this  16 
woman,   a  daughter  of  Abraham,  whom  the  Ca- 
lumniator''  hath  bound,  lo,  these  eighteen  years, 
ought  she  not  to  be  loosed  from  this  bond  on  the 
sabbath  day?     (17)  And  when  he  had  said  these  17 
things,  all  those  that  stood  up  against  him  were 
ashamed:  and  all  the  people  rejoiced  in  all  the 
miracles'^    that    were    wrought    by    his    hand. — 

(18)  And  Jesus  said :  To  what  is  the  kingdom  of  18 
God   like?   and   with   what  shall  I  compare   it? 

(19)  It  is  like  a  grain  of  mustard,  which  a  man  19 
took  and  cast  into  his  garden ;  and  it  grew,  and 
became  a  large  tree ;  and  a  bird  of  heaven  made 
her  nest  in  its  branches.     (20)  Jesus  said  again:  20 
With  what  shall  I  compare  the  kingdom  of  God  ? 
(21)  It  is  like  leaven,  which  a  woman  took  and  21 
hid  in  three  seahs^  of  meal,  until  the  whole  was 
fermented. 

And  he  travelled  throug-h  the  villages  and  cities,  22 
teaching  and  going  towards  Jerusalem.     (23)  And  23 
a    person    asked    him,    whether    they  Avere    few, 
who  would  have  life?o     (21)  And  Jesus  said  to  2i 
them :  Strive  to  enter  the  narrow  gate :  for  I  say 
to  you,  many  will  seek  to  enter,  and  will  not  be 
able.     (25)    From  the  time  that  the  lord  of  the  25 
house  shall  rise  and  close  the  door,  then  ye  will 
stand  without,  and  knock  at  the  door;  and  ye  will 
begin  to  say :  Our  Loi'd,  our  Lord,  open  to  us ; 
and  he  will  answer,  and  say :  I  tell  you,  I  know 
you  not,  whence  ye  are.     (26)  And  ye  will  begin  26 
to  say :  We  have  eaten  and  drunken  before  thee ; 


LUKE,    XIV. 


137 


27  and  thou  hast  taught  in  our  streets.  (27)  And  he 
will  say  to  jou:  I  know  you  not,  whence  ye  are: 

28  depart  from  me,  ye  doers  of  falsehood.  (28)  There 
will  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth,  when  ye 
will  see  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  and  all 
the  prophets,  in  the  kingdom  of  God ;  and  your- 

29  selves  will  be  thrust  ovit.  (29)  And  they  will 
come  from  the  east  and  from  the  west,  and  from 
the  south  and  from  the  north,  and  will  recline  in 

30  the  kingdom  of  God.  (30)  And  lo,  there  are  last 
that  will  be  first,  and  there  are  first  that  will  be 
last. 

31  On  the  same  day  came  some  of  the  Pharisees, 
and  said  to  him:    Go,   depart  hence;  for   Herod 

32  purposeth  to  kill  thee.  (32)  Jesus  said  to  them : 
Go  ye  and  tell  that  fox,  Behold,  I  cast  out  demons 
and  perform  cures,  to-day  and  to-morrow,  and  on 

33  the  third  day  I  shall  be  consummated.  (33)  But  I 
must  labor  to-day  and  to-morrow,  and  on  the  fol- 
lowing day  I  will  go ;  because  it  cannot  be,  that  a 
prophet   should    perish    away  from   Jerusalem. — 

34  (34)  0  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  that  killest  the  pro- 
phets, and  stonest  them  that  are  sent  to  thee; 
how  many  times  would  I  have  gathered  thy  chil- 
dren, as  a.  hen  that  gathereth  her  young  under 

35  her  wings,  and  ye  would  not?  (35)  Behold,  your 
house  is  left  to  you  desolate.  For  I  say  to  you : 
Ye  will  not  see  me,  until  ye  will  say.  Blessed  is  he 
that  Cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord, 

XIV.  And  it  occurred,  that,  as  he  entered  the 
house  of  one  of  the  chief  Pharisees  to  eat  bread, 

2  on  the  sabbath  day,  they  watched  him.     (2)     And 

3  lo,  a  dropsical^i  man  was  before  him.  (3)  And 
Jesus  answered,  and  said  to  the  Scribes  and  Phari- 

4  sees :  Is  it  lawful  to  heal  on  the  sabbath  ?  (4)  And 
they  were  silent.     And  he  took  him,  ai]d  healed 

5  him,  and  dismissed  him.  (5)  And  he  said  to  them: 
Which  of  you,  if  his  son  or  his  ox  fall  into  a  pit 
on  the  sabbath  day,  doth  not  immediately  lift  and 

6  draw  him  out?     (6)  And  they  could  give  him  no 

7  answer  to  that. — (7)  And  he  spoke  a  similitude 
to  the  guests  that  were  })resent,  as  he  noticed  how 

8  they  chose  places  on  the  highest  couches.  (8)  When 
thou  art  invited  by  any  one  to  a  house  of  feasting, 
go  not  and  recline  on  the  highest  couch ;  lest  there 


»  Sy.  who  had 
collected  water. 


138 


LUKE,    XIV. 


should  1)0  invited  there,  one  more  honorable  than 
thou ;  (y)  and  he  that  invited  both  liim  and  thee,     9 
come  and  say  to  thee,   Give  place  to  this  man ; 
and  thou  be  ashamed,  when  thou  risest,  and  takest 
a  lower  couch.      (10)   But  when  thou   art   invi-  10 
ted,    go   and  recline  on  the  lowest  [couch]  ;  that 
when  he  who  invited  thee  come,  he  may  say  to 
thee:    My  friend,    come   up   higher   and   recline. 
And  thou  wilt  have  honor,  before  all  that  recline 
with  thee.     (11)  For,  every  one  that  exalteth  him-  11 
self,  will  be  humbled:  and  everyone  that  hum- 
bleth  himself,  will  be  exalted. — (12)  And  he  said  12 
to  him  that  invited  him:  When   thou  makest  a 
dinner  or  a  supper,  invite  not  thy  friends,  nor  thy 
brothers,   nor  thy  relatives,   nor   thy  rich  neigh- 
bors; lest  they  also  invite   thee,  and   thou   have 
this  recompense.     (13)  But  when  thou  makest  a  13 
feast,  invite  the  poor,   tlie  maimed,  the  lame,  the 
blind.     (1-1)  And  thou  wilt  be  blessed.     For  they  14 
cannot  recompense  thee ;  but  thy  recompense  will 
be  at  the  resurrection  of  the  just. — (15)  And  when  15 
one  of  those  reclining  heard  these  things,  he  said  to 
him :  Blessed  is  he  that  shall  eat  bread  in  the  king- 
dom of  God.     (10)  Jesus  said  to  him:  A  certain  10 
man    made    a   great   supper,    and  invited  many. 
(17)  And  at  the  time  for  su})per,  he  sent  his  ser-  17 
vant  to  say  to  those  invited :  Lo,  every  thing  is 
ready  for  you ;  come.     (18)  And  they  all  to  a  man,  18 
began  to  excuse  themselves.     The  first  said  to  him  : 
I  have  bought  a  field,  and  am  constrained  to  go  out 
and  see  it.     I  pray  thee,  allow  me  to  be  excused. 
(19)  Another  said:  I  have  bought  five  yoke  of  19 
oxen,  and  I  go  to  inspect  them.     1  pray  thee,  allow 
me  to  be  excused.     (20)   Another  said :  I  have  20 
married  a  wife,  and  on  this  account  I  cannot  come. 
(21)  And  the  servant  came,  and  told  his  lord  these  21 
things.     Then  the  lord  of  the  house  was  angry : 
and  he  said  to  his  servant.  Go  out  quickly  into  the 
market-places  and  streets  of  the  city,  and  bring  in 
hither  the  poor,  and  the  diseased,  and  the  lame, 
and  the  blind.     (22)  And  the  servant  said:  My  22 
lord,  it  is  done   as  thou  commandedst;  and  still 
there  is  room.     (23)  And  the  lord  said  to  his  ser-  23 
vant:    Go  out  to  the   by-paths,  and   among   the 
hedges,  and.  constrain  them  to  come  in ;  that  my 
house  may  be  filled.     (24).  For  I  declare  to  you,  24 


LUKE,    XV. 


139 


that  not  one  of  those  men  that  were  invited,  shall 
taste  of  my  supper. 

25  And  when  great  multitudes  were  travelling  with 

26  him,  he  turned  himself,  and  said  to  them :  (26)  He 
that  Cometh  to  me,  and  hateth  not  his  father  and 
his  mother,  and  his  brothers  and  his  sisters,  and 
his  wife  and  his  children,  and  his  own  life''  also, 

27  cannot  become  a  disciple  to  me.  (27)  And  he  that 
doth  not  take  up  his  cross  and  come  after  me,  can- 

28  not  become  a  disciple  to  me.  (28)  For,  which  of 
you,  wishing  to  build  a  tower,  doth  not  first  sit 
down  and  compute  the  expense,  whether  he  have 

29  the  means  to  complete  it?  (29)  lest,  when  he  hath 
laid  the  foundation,  and  is  unable  to  finish,  all  that 

30  see  it  begin  to  deride  him ;  (30)  and  say :  This 
man    began  to  build,   and  was  unable  to  finish. 

31  (31)  Or  what  king,  that  is  going  to  contend  in  bat- 
tle with  his  neighbor  king,  doth  not  lirst  consider, 
whether  he  is  able,  with  ten  thousand,  to  meet  him 
that  is  coming  against  him  with  twenty  thousand  ? 

32  (32)  and  if  not;  while  he  is  yet  far  from  him,  he 

33  sendeth  envoj's,  and  sucth  for  peace.  (33)  So 
every  one  of  yon  who  doth  not  give  up  all  his 

34  possessions,  cannot  be  my  disciple. — (3-1)  Salt  is  a 
good  thing :  but  if  the  salt  itself  hath  become  in- 

35  sipid,  wi)erewith  shall  it  be  salted?  (35)  It  is  fif^ 
for  neither  the  earth,  nor  the  dunghill.  They  cast 
it  away. — He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear. 

XV.     And  publicans  and  sinners  came  to  him,  to  hear 

2  him.  (2)  And  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  mur- 
mured, and  said  :   This  man  receiveth  sinners,  and 

3  eateth  with  them.     (3)  And  Jesus  spoke  to  them 

4  this  similitude i^  (-4)  What  man  among  you,  that 
hath  a  hundred  sheep,  if  he  lose  one  of  them,  doth 
not  leave  the  ninety  and  nine  in  the  desert,  and  go 
and  seek  for  that  which  is  lost,  until  he  find  it? 

5  (5)  And  when    he    findeth   it,    he    rejoiceth,    and 

6  takcth  it  upon  his  shoulders;  (6)  and  he  cometh 
home,  and  he  calleth  together  his  friends  and 
neighbors,  and  saith  to  them:   Rejoice  with  me; 

7  for  1  have  found  my  slieej)  that  was  lost.  (7)  I 
say  to  you,  that  there  will  thus  be  joy  in  heaven, 
over  one  sinner  that  repenteth,  more  than  over 
ninety  and  nine  just  ones,  to  whom  repentance  was 

8  not  necessary. — (8)  Or  wliat  woman  is  there,  who, 


Sy.  m  «»  g^  1 


Sy.  goes  to. 


or,  parable. 


140 


LUKE,    XV. 


^  Sy.  sons  of  ihe 
cilij. 


""  Sy.  shoe  him. 


if  she  have  ten  drachmas,  and  lose  one  of  them, 
doth  not  light  a  lamp,  and  sweep  the  house,  and 
search  for  it  carefulW,  until  she  tiud  it?     (9)  And     9 
when  she  hath  found  it,  she  calleth  together  her 
friends  and  neighbors,  and  saith  to  them:    Rejoice 
with  me,  for  I  have  found  my  drachma  that  was 
lost.     (10)  1  say  to  you.  That  there  will  thus  be  10 
jo}',  before  the  angels  of  God,  over   one   sinner 
that  repenteth. — (11)   And    Jesus    said    to   them  11 
again:    A  certain  man  had  two  sons.     (12)  And  12 
his  younger  son  said  to  him:  My  father,  give  me 
the  portion  that  falleth  to  me    from   tliy  house. 
And  he  divided  to  them  his  property.     (13)  And  13 
after  a  few  days,  the  younger  son  collected  together 
all  that  fell  to  him,  and  went  to  a  distant  place; 
and  there  squandered  his  property,  by  living  in 
dissipation.     (14)  And  when  he  had  consumed  all  14 
that  he  had,  there  occurred  a  great  famine  in  that 
place;  and  he  began  to  be  in  want.     (15)  And  he  15 
went  and  connected  himself  with  one  of  the  citi- 
zens'^ of  that  place :  and  he  sent  him  into  the  field, 
to  tend  swine.     (16)  And  he  longed  to  fill  his  belly  16 
with  those  pods  which  the  swine  ate :  and  no  one 
gave  to  him.     (17)  And  when  he  came  to  himself, *=  17 
he  said:   IIow  many  hired  servants  are  now  at  my 
father's  house,  who  have  bread  enough,  and  I  am 
here  perishing  with  hunger.     (18)  I  will  arise  and  18 
go  to  my  father,   and  say  to  him :  My  father,  I 
have   sinned    against    heaven,    and    before   thee; 
(19)  and  am  no  longer  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son.  19 
Make  me  like  one  of  thy  hired  servants.     (20)  And  20 
he  arose  and  went  towards  his  father.     And  he 
was  yet  at  a  distance,  when  his  father  saw  him; 
and  he  pitied  him,  and  ran,  and  fell  upon  his  neck, 
and  kissed  him.     (21)  And  his  son  said  to  him:  21 
My  father,  I  have  sinned  against  heaven,  and  be- 
fore thee,  and  am  not  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son. 
(22)  But   his  father  said  to  his  servants:   Bring  22 
forth  the  best  robe,   and  clothe  him,  and  put  a 
ring  on   his  hand,   and  supply^  him  with  shoes. 
(23^  And  bring  forth  and  slay 'the  fatted  bullock;  23 
and  let  us  eat,  and  be  merry.     (24)  For,  this  my  24 
son  was  dead,  and  is  alive;  he  was  h^st    and   is 
found.     And  they  began  to  be  merry.     (25)  But  25 
his  elder  son  was  in  the  field;  and  as  he  came  and 
drew  near  to  the  house,  he  heard  the  sound  of  the 


LUKE,    XVI. 


141 


26  singing  of  many.     (26)  And  he  called  to  one  of 

27  the  boys,  and  asked  him  what  it  meant.  (27)  And 
he  said  to  him :  Thy  brother  hath  come ;  and  thy 
father  hath  killed  the  fatted  bullock,  because  he 

28  hath  received  him  in  health.  (28)  And  he  was 
angry,  and  would  not  go  in:  and  his  father  went 

29  out  and  entreated  him,  (29)  And  he  said  to  his 
father :  Lo,  these  many  years  have  I  labored  in  thy 
service,  and  never  transgressed  thy  command ;  and 
thou  never  gavest  me  a  kid,  that  I  might  make 

30  merry  with  my  friends.  (30)  But  for  this  thy  son, 
when  he  had  dissipated  thy  property  with  harlots, 
and  came  [home],  thou  hast  slain  the  fatted  bul- 

31  lock  for  him.  (31)  His  father  said  to  him:  My 
son,  thou  hast  been  ever  with  me,  and  all  that  I 

32  have,  is  thine.  (32)  But  it  was  proper  for  us  to 
be  merry,  and  to  rejoice ;  because  this  thy  brother 
was  dead,  and  is  alive ;  he  was  lost,  and  is  found. 

XVI.  And  he  spoke  a  parable  to  his  disciples.  There 
was  a  certain  rich  man,  who  had  a  steward ;  and 
accusations  were  brought  to  him  of  him,  that  he 

2  squandered  his  property.  (2)  And  his  lord  called 
him,  and  said  to  him :  What  is  this  that  I  hear  of 
thee?  Hender  to  me  an  account  of  thy  steward- 
ship ;    for  thou  canst  no  longer  be  my  steward. 

3  (3)  And  the  steward  said  with  himself:  What 
shall  I  do,  since  my  lord  is  about  to  take  from  me 
the  stewardship  ?     To  dig,  I  am  unable ;  and  to 

4  become  a  beggar,  I  am  ashamed.  (-4)  I  know  what 
to  do,  that,  when  I  am  -put  out  of  the  stewardship, 

5  they  may  receive  me  to  their  houses.  (5)  And  he 
called  each  one  of  his  lord's  debtors ;  and  he  said 
to  the  first.  How  much  owest  thou  to  my  lord? 

6  (6)  And  he  said  to  him,  One  hundred  measures^  of 
oil.     And  he  said  to  him :  Take  thy  bill,  and  sit 

7  down  quickly,  and  write  Fifty  measures.  (7)  And 
he  said  to  another :  And  how  much  owest  thou  to 
my  lord  ?  And  he  said  to  him,  One  hundred  cors^ 
of  wheat.     And  he  said  to  him :  Take  thy  bill,  and 

8  sit  down,  and  write  Eighty  cors.  (8)  And  our  Lord 
praised  the  unrighteous  steward,  for  having  acted 
sagaciously :  for  the  children  of  this  world  are  more 
sagacious  than  the  children  of  light,  in  this  their 

9  generation.  (9)  And  I  also  say  to  you :  Make  to 
yourselves  friends,  with  this  unrighteous  mammon  ;<= 


»  Sy.  ^5/^, 
Gr.  fxSTpTjTtti. 


Sy.  —.tOD 


Sy.  'jjolok) 


<■  or,  the  truth. 


Sy.  ^3,  high. 


f  Sy.  5pA 


Sy.  \ciQ.^ 

Sy.  ^aj:^, 
Gr.  uSrig. 


SO  that  when  it  is  finisliccl,  they  may  receive  you 
to  their  everlasting  taberuacles.     (10)  He  that  is  10 
faithful  in  the  little,  is  also  faithful  in  the  much; 
and  he  that  is  unjust  in  the -little,  is  also  unjust  in 
the  much.     (11)   If  therefore  ye  have  not  been  11 
faithful   in  the   unrighteous  mammon,  who  will 
intrust  to  you  the  reality  ?'i     (12)  And  if  ye  have  12 
not  been    found   faithful    in    that   which   is   not 
yours,  who  will  give  to  you  that  which  is  yours  ? 
(13)  There  is  no  servant,  who  can  serve  two  lords.  13 
For,  either  he  will  hate  the  one  and  love  the  other, 
or  he  will  honor  the  one  and  despise  the  other. 
Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon. 

And  the  Pharisees,  when  they  heard  all  these  14 
things,  because  they  loved  money,  derided  him. 
(15)  And  Jesus  said  to  them:  Ye  are  such  as  jus-  15 
t\§y  yourselves  before  men ;    but   God   knoweth 
your  heart :  for  that  which  is  exalted^  among  men, 
is  abominable  before  God.     (16)  The  law  and  the  16 
prophets  were  until  John :  since  then,  the  kingdom 
of  God  is  proclaimed,  and  every  one  presseth  it  to 
enter  in.     (17)  And   it  is  easier  for  heaven  and  17 
earth  to  pass  away,  than  for  one  letter  to  pass  from 
the  law. — (IS)  Whoever  putteth  away  his  wife,  18 
and   taketh   another,    committeth   adultery ;    and 
whoever  taketh  her  that  is  put  away,  committeth 
adilltery. — (19")  And  there  was  a  certain  rich  man,  19 
who  was  clotned  in  fine  linen  and  scarlet,   and 
passed  every  day  in  splendid  luxury.     (20)  And  20 
there  was  a  certain  poor  man,  whose  name  was 
Lazarus  ;f  and  he  was  laid  at  the  gate  of  the  rich 
man,  smitten  with  ulcers.     (21)  And  he  desired  to  21 
fill  his  belly  with  the  fragments  that  fell  from  the 
rich   man's  table:  and  the  dogs  also   came   and 
licked  his  ulcers.     (22)   And  so  it  was,  that  the  22 
poor  man  died;   and  angels  transported  him   to 
Abraham's  bosora.s     The  rich  man  also  died,  and 
was  buried.     (23)  And  being  tormented  in  hell,h  23 
he  raised  his  eyes  from  afar  off,  and  saw  Abraham, 
and  Lazarus  in  his  bosom.    (2-1)  And  he  called  with  24 
a  loud  voice,  and  said :  Abraham,  my  father,  have 
pity  on  me ;  and  send  Lazarus,  that  he  may  dip  the 
tip  of  his  finger  in  water,  and  moisten  my  tongue ; 
for,  lo,  I  am  tormented  in  this  flame.     (25)  And  25 
Abraham  said  to  him :  My  son,  remember,  that 
thou  receivedst  thy  good  things  in  thj'"  lifetime, 


LUKE,    XVII. 


143 


and  Lazarus  his  evil  things :  and  now,  behold,  he 

26  is  here  at  rest,  and  thou  art  tormented.  (26)  And 
with  all  these,  there  is  a  great  barrier'  between  us 
and  you;  so  that  they  who  would  pass  from  here 
to  you,  cannot;  neither  [can  they]  pass  from  there 

27  to  us.  (27)  He  said  to  him :  I  pray  thee,  there- 
fore, my  father,  that  thou  wouldst  send  him  to  my 

28  father's  house ;  (28)  for  I  have  five  brothers ;  that 
he  may  go  and  protest  to  them ;  lest  they  also  come 

29  to  this  place  of  torment.  (29)  Abraham  said  to 
him :  They  have  Moses  and.  the  prophets,  let  them 

80  hear  them.  (80)  But  he  said  to  him :  No,  my 
father  Abraham :  but  if  one  shall  go  to  them  from 

81  the  dead,  they  will  repent.  (81)  Abraham  said  to 
him:  If  they  hear  not  Moses  and  the  prophets, 
they  will  not  believe,  though  one  should  rise  from 
the  dead. 

XYII.  And  Jesus  said  to  his  disciples :  It  cannot  be, 
but  that  offences^  will  come :  but  woe  to  him,  by 

2  whom  they  come.  (2)  Better  for  him  were  it,  if  a 
millstone  were  suspended  to  his  neck,  and  he  cast 
into  the  sea,  than  that  he  should  cause  one  of  these 

3  little  ones  to  stumble.  (8)  Take  heed  to  your- 
selves.— If  thy  brother   transgress,    rebuke   him; 

4  and  if  he  repent,  forgive  him.  (4)  And  if  he  shall 
offend  against  thee  seven  times  in  a  day,  and,  seven 
times  in  a  day,  shall  turn  himself  to  thee,  and  say, 

5  I  repent ;  forgive  him. — (5)  And  the  Legates^  said 

6  to  our  Lord:  Increase  our  faith.  (6)  He  said  to 
them :  If  ye  had  faith  like  a  grain  of  mustard,  seed, 
ye  might  say  to  this  mulberry-tree,  Be  thou  torn 
up  by  the  roots,  and  be  thou  planted  in  the  sea ; 

7  and  it  would  obey  you. — (7)  Which  of  you,  having 
a  servant  driving  a  yoke  of  oxen,  or  tending  sheep, 
will  say  to  him  when  he  cometh  from  the  field, 

8  Pass  on  at  once,  and  recline  for  supper  ?  (8)  But 
he  will  say  to  him :  Prepare  for  me  what  I  may 
sup  upon,  and  gird  thy  loins  and  serve  me,  until  I 
have  eaten  and  drunken ;  and  afterwards  thou  shalt 

9  eat  and  drink.  (9)  Hath  he  thanks  for  him,  be- 
cause the  servant  did  what  was  commanded  him  ? 

10  I  think  not.  (10)  So  also  ye,  when  ye  have  done 
all  the  things  commanded  you,  say :  We  are  un- 
profitable servants,  for  we  have  done  only  what 
we  were  obligated  to  do. 


Sy.lki 


A£n 


Sy.  __ 

stumhling- 
hlocks. 


*>  or,  Apostles. 


144 


LUKE,    XVII. 


Sv. 


UA^ 


Sy.  ^Ax>^l 


Sy. 


And  it  occurred  as  Jesus  advanced  towards  Jeru-  11 
salem,  that  he  j^assed  among  the  Samaritans  into 
GaUlee.'=     (12)  And  when  he  drew  near  to  enter  a  12 
certain  village,   there  met  him  ten  leprous  men; 
and  they  stood  at  a  distance,  (13)  and  raised  their  13 
voice,  and  said:  Our  Rabbi,  Jesus,  have  compas- 
sion upon  us.     (14)  And  when  he  had  looked  up-  14 
on  them,  he  said  to  them :  Go,  show  yourselves  to 
the  priests.     And  as  they  were  going,  they  were 
cleansed.     (15)  And  one  of  them,  when  he  saw  15 
that  he  was  cleansed,  returned,  and  with  a  loud 
voice,  glorified  God.     (16)  And  he  fell  on  his  face,  16 
at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  and  thanked  him.     And  he 
was  a  Samaritan.     (17)  And  Jesus  answered,  and  17 
said:    Were   they   not  ten   who   were   cleansed? 
Where  are  the  nine?     (18)  Have  they  so  gone  as  18 
not  to  come  and  give  glory  to  God ;  except  this 
one,  who  is  of  another  nation?     (19)  And  he  said  19 
to  him :  Arise,  and  go :  thy  faith  hath  given  thee 
life.d 

And   as    [some]    of  the  Pharisees   asked   him,  20 
When  the  kingdom  of  God  would  come ;  he  an- 
swered, and  said  to  them :  The  kingdom  of  God 
will  not  come  with  observables.^     (21)  And  they  21 
will  not  say :  Behold,  here  it  is !  or.  Behold,  it  is 
there !     For  lo,  the  kingdom  of  God  is  Avithin  you. 
— (22)  And  he  said  to  his  disciples :  The  days  will  22 
come,  when  ye  will  long  to  see  one  of  the  days  of 
the   Son   of  man,    and  ye  will   not  see    [them]. 
(23)  And  if  they  shall  say  to  you :  Lo,  here  he  is  !  23 
or,  Lo,  there  he  is!    go  not  forth.     (24)  For,  as  24 
the  lightning  darteth  from  the  heavens,  and  illu- 
minateth  all  beneath  the  heavens;    so  will  the  Son 
of  man  be,  in  his  day.     (25)  But,  previously,  he  25 
is  to  suffer  many  things,  and  to  be  rejected  by  this 
generation.     (26)  And  as  it  was  in  the  daj^s  of  26 
Noah,  so  will  it  be  in  the  days  of  the  Son  of  man. 
(27)   They  ate  and  drank,  they  took  wives  and  27 
were  given  to  husbands,  until  the  day  that  Noah 
entered  the  ark ;  and  the  flood  came,  and  destroyed 
every  one.     (28)  And  again,  as  it  was  in  the  days  28 
of  Lot;   they  ate   and   drank,   bought   and   sold, 
planted  and  built.     (29)  But  in  the  day  that  Lot  29 
went  out  of  Sodom,    the   Lord  rained   fire   and 
sulphur   from    heaven,    and    destroyed   them   all. 
(SOj  Thus  will  it  be,  in  the  day  when  the  Son  of  30 


LUKE,    XVIII. 


145 


31  man  shall  be  revealed.  (31)  In  that  day,  let  him 
that  is  on  the  house-top,  and  his  goods  in  the  house, 
not  come  down  to  take  them :  and  let  him  that  is 
in  the  field,  not  return  [after  what  is]  behind  him 

32  (32)  Remember  Lot's  wife.     (33)  He  that  desireth 

33  to   preserve^  his  life,  will   lose   it;    and  he  that 
31  will  lose  his  life,  shall  preserves  it.     (34)  I  tell 

you,  that,  in  that  night,  two  will  be  in  one  bed 

35  one  will  be  taken,  and  the  other  left.  (35)  And 
two  females  will  be  grinding  together;  one  will  be 

36  taken,  and  the  other  left.  (36)  Two  men  will  be 
in  the  field ;  one  will  be  taken,  and  the  other  left. 

37  — (37)  They  answered,  and  said  to  him :  Whither, 
our  Lord  ?  He  said  to  them :  Where  the  body 
is,   there  will   the  eagles  assemble  themselves. — 

XVIII.  And  he  spoke  to  them  a  similitude  also,  that 
men  should  pray  at  all  times,  ^  and  not  become 

2  weary,  (2)  There  was  a  judge  in  a  certain  city, 
who    feared    not    God,    and    regarded    not  men. 

3  (3)  And  there  was  a  certain  widow  in  that  city ; 
and  she  afane  to  him,    and   said :    Vindicate  me 

4  against  my  adversary.  (4)  And  he  would  not,  for 
a  long  time :  but  afterwards,  he  said  to  himself: 
Though   I   fear   not   God,    and  regard  not  men, 

5  (5)  yet,  because  this  widow  troubleth  me,  I  will 
vindicate  her;  that  she  may  not  be  always  coming 

6  and  troubling  me.     (6)  And  our  Lord  said :  Hear 

7  what  the  unjust  judge  saith.  (7)  An-d  will  not 
God,  much  more,  vindicate  his  chosen,  who  call 
upon  him  bj^  day  and  by  night ;  and  have  patience 

8  with  them  ?  (8)  I  tell  you,  He  will  vindicate  them 
speedily.  Yet  the  Son  of  man  will  come ;  and 
will  he  find  faith  on  the  earth  ? 

9  And  he  spake  this  similitude,  against  certain 
persons,  who  had  confidence  in  themselves  that 
they  were    righteous,    and    despised   every   one. 

10  (10)  Two  men  went  up  to  the  temple  to  pray ;  the 

11  one  a  Pharisee,  and  the  other  a  publican.  (11)  And 
the  Pharisee  stood  by  himself,  and  prayed  thus : 
God,  I  thank  thee  that  I  have  not  been  like  the 
rest  of  men,  rapacious,  oppressive,  and  adulterous ; 

12  nor  like  this  publican.     (12)  But  I  fast  twice  in  a 

13  week,  and  tithe  all  I  possess.  (13)  And  the  pub- 
lican stood  afar  off,  and  would  not  even  lift  his  eyes 
to  heaven,  but  smote  upon  his  breast,  and  said: 

14  God,  be  merciful  to  me,  a  sinner.     (14)  I  say  to 


f  Sy.  I.kkJJ 
f  Sy.  OTa.*.KJ 


Sv. 

or,  every  op- 
portunity. 


146 


LUKE,   XVIII. 


Sy.  »Dj^lD 


Sy.  ]i  "  -'^ 
Sv.  "ji  g^V-0 

H4 


Sy-V^^J!^ 


'  Gr.  Peter. 


you,  that  this  [man]  went  clown  to  his  house  justi- 
lied,^  rather  than  the  Pharisee.  For  every  one 
that  exalteth  himself,  will  be  humbled ;  and  every 
one  that  humbleth  himself,  will  be  exalted. 

And  they  brought  to  him  infiints,  that  he  might  15 
touch  them :  and  his  disciples  saw  them,  and  re- 
buked them.     (IG)  But   Jesus  called   them,    and  16 
said  to  them :    Suffer  little  children  to  come  to 
me,  and  forbid  them  not ;    for  of  those  that  are 
like   them,   of  such   is  the  kingdom   of  heaven. 
(17)  Verily  I  say  to  you,  That  he  who  shall  not  17 
receive  the  kingdom  of  God,  as  a  little  child,  will 
not  enter  it. 

And  one  of  the  chiefs^  asked  him,  and  said  to  18 
him:  Good  Teacher, "^  what  shall  I  do,  that  I  may 
inherit  eternal  life  ?     (19)  Jesus  said  to  him:  Why  19 
callest  thou  me,  good?     For,  there  is  none  good, 
except  one;  God.     (20)   Thou  knowest  the  com-  20 
mandments:  Thou  shalt  not  kill;  and  thou  shalt 
not  commit  adultery;  and  thou  shalt  not  steal; 
and  thou  shalt  not  testify  a  false  testinfon}' ;  honor 
thy  father    and    thy   mother.      (21)    He   said   to  21 
him :  All  these  have  I  kept,  from  my  childhood. 

(22)  And  when  Jesus  heard  these  [words],  he  said  22 
to  him:  One  thing  is  lacking  to  thee:  go,  sell  all 
that  thou  hast,  and  give  to  the  poor;  and  thou 
wilt  have  a  treasure  in  heaven ;  and  come  after  me, 

(23)  And  he,  when  he  heard  these  [words],  was  23 
dejected;  for  he  was  very  rich.     (2-1)  And  when  21 
Jesus  saw  tliat  he  was   dejected,   he  said:    How 
difficult  [it  is],  for  those  that  have  wealth,  to  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  God!     (25)  It  is  easier  for  a  25 
camel  to  enter  the  eye  of  a  needle,  than  a  rich 
man  the  kingdom  of  God.     (26)  They  who  heard  26 
[it],    said   to   him:    Who    then   can  have^   life? 
(27)  And  Jesus  said:  Those  things  which,   with  27 
men,  cannot  be,  with  God,  can  be. — (28)     Simon  28 
Cephas^  said  to  him :  Lo,  we  have  left  every  thing, 
and   come   after  thee.     (29)  Jesus   said   to  him:  29 
Verily  I  say  to  you:  There  is  no  man,  who  hath 
deft  houses,  or  parents,  or  brothers,  or  wife,  or  chil- 
dren, for  the  sake  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  (30)  that  30 
shall  not  receive  manifold   in   the   present   time, 
land,  in  the  coming  world,  eternal  life. 

And  Jesus  took  his  twelve,  and  said  to  them:  31 
I  Behold,  we  are  going  up  to  Jerusalem ;  and  aU  the 


things  written  in  the  prophets,  concerning  the  Sori 
82  of  man,  will  be  fulfilled.  (32)  For  he  will  be  dei 
livered  over  to  the  Gentiles ;  and  they  will  mock 
him,  and  spit  in  his  face ;  (33)  and  will  scourge  him^ 
and  will  treat  him  with  ignominy,  and  will  kill 
him ;  and,  the  third  day,  he  will  arise.  (34)  But 
not  one  of  these  things,  did  they  understand ;  but 
this  subject?  was  hidden  from  them,  and  they  knew 
not  the  things  told  to  them. 

And  as  they  came  near  to  Jericho,  a  blind  man 
was  sitting  by  the  side  of  the  way,  beggingi 
(36)  And  he  heard  the  noise  of  the  multitude  that 
passed,  and  inquired  what  it  was.  (37)  They 
say  to  him:  Jesus  the  Nazarean  is  passing  hjl 
(38)  And  he  called  out,  and  said :  Jesus,  Son  of! 
89  David,  have  mercy  on  me.  (39)  And  they  thai 
went  before  Jesus  rebuked  him,  that  ne  might  be 
silent.  But  he  cried  out  the  more.  Son  of  David; 
have  mercy  on  me.  (40)  And  Jesus  stood,  and 
commanded  him  to  be  called  to  him.  And  when 
he  came  to  him,  he  asked  him,  (41)  and  said  to 
him:  What  wilt  thou,  that  I  do  for  thee?  And 
he  said :  My  Lord,  that  I  may  see.  (42)  An^ 
Jesus  said  to  him :  See  thou ;  thy  fiiith  hath  vivi-! 
fied'i  thee.  (43)  And  imm.ediately  he  saw.  And 
he  followed  after  him,  and  glorified  God.  And  al| 
the  j)eople  who  beheld,  gave  glory  to  God.  ' 


83 
84 


oo 

86 
37 

88 


40 


41 


42 
43 


XIX.     And   as   Jesus   entered   and   passed   througli 

2  Jericho,  (2)  [there  was]  a  certain  man,  whose  name 
was  Zaccheus,^  who  v/as  rich,  and  chief*  of  the 

3  publicans;  (3)  and  he  wished  to  see  Jesus,  whp  he 
was ;  and  could  not,  on  account  of  the  crowd ;  be| 

4  cause  Zaccheus  was  small  in  stature.  (4)  And  hA 
ran  forward  of  ^Jesus,  and  climbed  a  wild  fig-treej' 
in  order  to  sec  him ;  for  he  was  to  pass  that  wayl 

5  (5)  And  when  Jesus  came  to  the  place,  he  saw 
him,  and  said  to  him :  Make  haste  and  come  down] 
Zaccheus;    for  I  must  be   at  thy  house  to-day; 

6  (6)  And  he  hastened,  and  came  down,  and  received 

7  him  with  gladness.  (7)  And  when  they  all  saw 
[it],  they  murmured,  and  said:  lie  hath  gone  iii 

8  to  he  guest  with  a  man  that  is  a  sinner.  (8)  Anid 
Zaccheus  stood  up,  and  said  to  Jesus :  Behold,  my 
Lord,  the  half  of  my  riches  I  give  to  the  poorj 
and  to  every  man,  whom  I  have  wronged  in  mjf 


e  Sy.  word. 


"•  Sy.  ^C\A^] 


"  Sy.  ^y 


148 


LUKE,   XIX. 


Sy.  \j^ 
Sy.  "^>J0 
or,  parable. 


Gr.  |xva^. 


jjV)= 


eSv, 


y.  S071S. 


12 


tiling,  I  restore  fourfold.     (9)  Jesus  said  to  him:     9 
This  day,  life''  is  to  this  house ;  for  he  also  is  a  son 
of  Abraham.     (10)  For  the  Son  of  man  came,  to  10 
seek  and  to  vivify^  that  which  was  lost. 

And  when  they  heard  these  things,  he  proceeded  11 
to  utter  a  similitude  ;«^  because  he  was  near  to  Jeru- 
salem, and  they  supposed  that  the  kingdom  of  God 
was  to  be  soon  developed.     (12)  And  he  said :  A 
certain  man  of  high  birth  was  going  to  a  distant 
place,  to  obtain  royalty,  and  return  again.  (13)  And  13 
he  called  his  ten  servants,   and   gave   them   ten 
pounds  :*"  and  he  said  to  them,  Traffic  until  I  come. 
(11)  But  the  inhabitants?  of  his  city  hated  him ;  11 
and  they  sent  envoys  after  him,  saying :  We  wish 
this  man  not  to  reign  over  us.     (15)  And  when  he  15 
had  obtained  the  royalty,  and  had  returned,  he 
commanded  those  servants  to  be  called,  to  whom 
he  had  committed  his  money ;  that  he  might  know 
what    each    of    them     had     gained    by    trading. 
(16)  And  the  first  came,  and  said:  My  Lord,  thy  16 
pound  hath  gained  ten  pounds.     (17)  He  said  to  17 
him:    Well   done,  good  servant!     As  thou  hast 
been  faithful  over  a  little,  thou  shalt  have  author- 
ity over  ten  towns.     (18)  And  the  second  came, 
and  said :  My  lord,  thy  pound  hath  produced  five 
pounds.     (19)  He  said  likewise  to  him :  Thou  also 
shalt  have  authority  over  five  towns.     (20)  And 
another  came,  and  said:  My  lord,  lo,  this  is  thy 
pound,  which  hath  been  with  me,  laid  up  in  fine 
linen.     (21)  For  I  was  afraid  of  thee,  because  thou  21 
art  a  hard  man,  and  takest  up  that  which  thou  lay- 
edst  not  down,  and  reapest  that  which  thou  sowedst 
not.     (22)  He  said  to  him :  Out  of  thy  own  mouth  22 
will  I  judge  thee,  thou  evil  servant.     Thou  knew- 
est  me,  that  I  am  a  hard  man,  and  that  I  take  up 
what  I  laid  not  down,  and  reap  what  I  sowed  not ! 
(23)  Why  didst  thou  not  put  my  money  into  the  23 
broker's  hands,  that  when  I  came,  I  might  have 
demanded  it  with  interest?     (24)  And  he  said  to 
them  that  stood  before  him:  Take  from  him  the 
pound,  and  give  it  to  him  Avith  whom  are  the  ten 
l)ounds.     (25)  They  say  to  him :  Our  lord,  there 
are  with  him  ten  pounds.     (26)  He  said  to  them  : 
I  tell  you,  that  to  every  one  that  hath,  will  be 
given ;  and  from  him  that  hath  not,  even  what  he 
hath  will  be  taken  away.     (27)  But  as  for  those 


18 

19 
20 


24 


25 
26 


27 


LUKE,    XIX. 


149 


mj  enemies,  who  would  not  have  me  to  reign  over 
them,  bring  them  and  slay  them  before  me. 

28  And  when  Jesus  had  spoken  these  things,   he 

29  went  forward,  to  go  to  Jerusalem.  (29)  And  when 
he  arrived  at  Bethphage  and  Bethany,  near  to  the 
mount  called  the  place  of  Olives,  he  sent  two  of 

30  his  disciples,  (80)  and  said  to  them:  Go  ye  to  the 
village  that  is  over  against  us,  and  as  ye  enter  [it], 
ye  will  find  a  colt  tied,  on  which  no  man  ever  rode ; 

31  loose  [him]  and  bring  [him].  (31)  And  if  any 
man  ask  you.  Why  do  ye  loose  him?  say  to  liini: 

32  Our  Lord  needeth  him.  (32)  And  they  went  who 
were  sent,  and  they  found,   as  he  said  to  them. 

33  (33)  And  as  they  loosed  the  colt,  the  owner  of 
him  said  to  them:   Why  do  ye  loose  that  colt? 

31  (31)  And  they  said:  Because  our  Lord  needeth 

35  him.  (35)  And  they  brought  him  to  Jesus.  And 
they  cast  their  garments  upon  the  colt,  and  set 

36  Jesus   upon   him.      (36)    And   as   he  went,    they 

37  spread  their  garments  in  the  way.  (37)  And  when 
he  came  near  to  the  descent  of  the  place  of  Olives, 
the  whole  multitude  of  the  disciples  began  to  re- 
joice, and  to  praise  God,  with  a  loud  voice,  for  all 

38  the  mighty  deeds'^  which  they  had  seen.    (38)  x\nd 
.  they  said :  Blessed  be  the  king,  that  cometh  in  the 

name  of  the  Lord :  peace  in  heaven,  and  glory  on 

39  high.  (39)  And  some  of  the  Pharisees  from  among 
the  crowd,  said  to  him :  Rabbi,  rebuke  thy  disei- 

40  pies.  (10)  He  said  to  them :  I  tell  you,  that,  if 
these  should  be  silent,  the  stones  would  cry  out. — 

41  (41)  And  as  he  drew  near,  and  beheld  the  city,  he 

42  wept  over  it:  (42)  and  said:  0,  haclst  thou  known 
the  things  that  are  of  thy  peace,  at  least  in  this  thy 
day :  but   now  they  are   hidden   from   thy  eyes. 

43  (43)  For  the  days  will  come  upon  thee,  when  thy 
enemies  will  encompass  thee,  and  besiege  thee  on 

44  every  side.  (44)  And  they  will  destroy  thee,  and 
thy  children  within  thee;  and  will  not  leave  in 
thee  one  stone'  upon  another;  because  thou  knew- 

45  est  not  the  time  of  thy  visitation; — (45)  And  when 
he  entered  the  temple,  he  began  to  expel  those 

46  who  bought  and  sold  in  it.  (46)  And  he  said  to 
them :  It  is  written,  My  house  is  a  house  of  prayer ; 

47  but  ye  have  made  it  a  den  of  robbers. — (47)  And 
he  taught  daily  in  the  temple :  and  the  chief  priests 
and  Scribes  and  Elders  of  the  people,  sought  to 


Sy.UI 


Sy.  stoTie  vpan 
stone. 


iso 


LUKE,   XX. 


•  Sy.  he  added 
ancL 

•'  Sy.  lie  added 
and. 


kiestroy  him.     (48)  But  they  found  not,  what  they  48 
could  do  to  him ;  for  all  the  people  hung  upon  him 
to  hear  him. 

And  on  one  of  those  days,  as  he  was  teaching  XX. 
the  people  in  the  temple,  and  preaching,  the  chief 
priests  and  Scribes,  with  the  Elders,  came  upon 
.him,  (2)  and  said  to  him :  Tell  us,  by  what  author-     2 
•ity  thou  doest  these  things?     Anft  who  is  it,  that 
gave  thee   this  authority?      (3)  Jesus  answered,     3 
and  said  to  them :  I  also  will  ask  you  a  word, 
and  tell  ye  me.     (4)  The  baptism  of  John,  was  it     4 
from  heaven,   or  from  men?     (5)  And  they  rea-     5 
soned  with  themselves,  and  said:  If  we  say.  From 
heaven ;  he  will  say  to  us.  And  why  did  ye  not 
believe  him?     (6)  Jiut  if  we  say.  From  men;  all     6 
the  people  will  stone  us ;  for  they  are  persuaded 
that  John  was  a  prophet.     (7)  And  they  said  to     7 
him:  We  do  not  know,  whence  it  was.     (8)  Jesus     8 
said  to  them :  Neither  do  I  tell  you,  by  what  au- 
thority I  do  these  things. 

And  he  began  to  utter  this  similitude  to  the     9 
.people:  A  certain  man  planted  a  vineyard,  and 
leased  it  to  cultivators,  and  went  abroad  for  a  long 
time.     (10)  And  in  time,  he  sent  his  servant  to  the  10 
cultivators,  that  they  might  give  him  of  the  fruits 
of  the  vineyard.     But  the  cultivators  beat  him, 
and  sent  him  away  empty.     (11)  And  again*  he  11 
sent  another  servant ;  and  him  also  they  beat,  and 
treated   with    rudeness,    and    sent    empty   away. 
(12)   And  againiJ   he  sent  the  third.     And  they  12 
wounded  him,  and  cast  him  out.     (13)  The  lord  13 
of  the  vineyard  said:    What  shall  I  do?     I  will 
send  my  dear  son.     Perhaps  they  will  look  upon 
him,  and  be  ashamed.     (14)  But  when  the  culiiva-  14 
tors  saw  him,  they  reasoned  with  themselves,  and 
said:  This  is  the  heir;  come,  let  us  kill  him,  and 
the  inheritance  will  be  ours.     (15)  And  they  cast  15 
him  out  of  the  vineyard,  and  slew  him.     What 
therefore  will  the  lord  of  the  vineyard  do  to  them? 
(IH)  He  will  come,  and  destroy  those  cultivators,  16 
and  will  lease  the  vineyard  to  others. — And  when 
they   heard    [it],    they  said:    This   shall    not    be. 
(17)  And  he  looked  u])on  them,  and  said:  What  17 
is  that  which    is  written.   The   stone,   which   the 
builders  rejected,  is  become  the  chief  corner  stonj  ? 


LUKE,    XX. 


151 


18  (18)  And  whoever  shall  fall  upon  this  stone,  will  be 
broken ;  and  on  whomsoever  it  shall  fall,  it  will 

19  crush  him  in  pieces.  (19)  And  the  chief  priests 
and  Scribes  sought  to  lay  hands  on  him,  at  that 
time;<=  but  they  were  afraid  of  the  people;  for 
they  knew,  that  he  spoke  this  similitude  against 
them. 

20  And  they  sent  to  him  spies,  who  feigned  them- 
selves righteous  men,  that  they  might  insnare  him 
in  discourse,  and  deliver  him  up  to  a  court,  and  to 

21  the  authority  of  the  president.'^  (21)  And  they 
questioned  him,  and  said  to  him:  .Teacher, ^^  we 
know  that  thou  speakest  and  teachcst  correctly, 
and   hast  no  respect  of  persons,  but  teachest  the 

22  way  of  God  in  truth.     (22)  Is  it  lawful  for  us  to 

23  pay  head-money  to  Caesar,  or  not?  (23)  But  he 
perceived  their  craftiness,  and  said:  Why  tempt  ye 
me?  (24)  Show  me  a  denarius.  Whose  is  this 
image  and  superscription  upon  it?     They  said  to 

25  him,  Coesar's.  (25)  Jesus  said  to  them  :  Then,  give 
to  Cassar  what  is  Caesar's,  and  to  God  what  is  God's. 
(26)  And  they  could  not  catch  from  him  a  word 
[of  accusation]  before  the  people :  and  they  were 
surprised  at  his  answers,  and  were  silent. 

And  some  of  the  Sadducees,  who  say  there  is  no 
resurrection,  came  and  questioned  him,  (28)  and 
said  to  him:  Teachfer,  Moses  wrote  to  us,  that  if  a 
man's  brother  die,  who  had  a  wife  without  chil- 
dren, his  [surviving]  brother  shall  take  his  wife,  and 
raise  up  seed  to  his  [deceased]  brother.  (29)  Now, 
tlicre  were  seven  brothers ;  and  the  first  took  a 
wife,  and  died  without  children.  (30)  And  the 
second  took  her  to  wife;  and  he  died  without  chil- 
dren. (31)  And  again,  the  third  took  her,  and  in 
like  manner  also  all  the  seven  ;  and  they  died,  and 
left  no  children.  (32)  At  last,  the  woman  likewise 
died.  (33)  In  the  resurrection,  therefore,  of  which 
of  them  will  she  be  the  wife,  for  the  seven  took  her? 

34  (34)  Jesus  said  to  them:  The  children  of  this 
Avorld  take  wives,  and  wives  are  given  to  husbands. 

35  (35)  But  they  who  are  worthy  of  that  world,  and 
of  the  resurrection  from  the  dead,   do  not  take 

36  wives,  nor  are  wives  given  to  husbands.  (36)  Nei- 
ther can  they  die  any  more ;  for  they  are  as  the 
angels,  and  are  the  children  of  God,  beca/.se  they 

37  are   children  of  the   resurrection.     (37)  But  that 


24 


26 


27 
28 


29 

30 

31 

32 
33 


Sy.  hour. 


Sy. 

pnV)..cn 

Sy.  li^^^n 


152 


LUKE,    XXI. 


Sy.  "jjokL 


the  dead  will  arise,  even  Moses  showed ;  for,  at  the 
bush,   he   niaketh   mention,   while   he  saith:   The 
Lord,  the  God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac,  and 
the  God  of  Jacob.     (38)  Now  God  is  not  [the  God]  38 
of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living ;  for  they  all  live  to 
him.     (39)  And   some   of  the   Scribes  answered,  39 
and  said  to  him :  Teacher,  thou  hast  spoken  well. 
(40)  And  they  did  not  again  venture  to  question  40 
him,  on  anj'  matter. 

And  he  said  also  to  them :  How  do  the  Scribes  41 
say  of  Messiah,    that   he   is   the   son   of  Pavid? 
(42)    And   David   himself  said,    in   the   book   of  42 
Psalms :  The  Lord  said  to  my  Lord,  seat  thyself 
at  my  right  hand,  (43)  until  I  shall  place  thy  foes^  43 
under  thy  feet.     (44)  If  David,   therefore,  called  44 
him.   My  Lord;    how  is   he  his  son?     (45)  And  45 
while  all  the  people  heard,  he  said  to  his  disciples: 
(46)  Beware  of  the  Scribes,  who  choose  to  walk  in  46 
long  robes,  and  love  a  salutation  in  the  streets,  and 
the  chief  seats  in  the  synagogues,  and  the  chief 
couches  at  suppers:  (47)  who  eat  up  the  houses  of  47 
widows,   under  pretence  that  they  prolong  their 
prayers.  They  will  receive  a  greater  condemnation. 

And  Jesus  looked  upon  the  rich,  who  cast  their  XXL 
oblations  into  the  treasury.     (2)  And  he  saw  also     2 
a  certain   poor  widow,  who  cast  in  two  mites.^ 
(3)  And  he  said :  Truly  I  say  to  you,  that  this  poor     3 
widow  hath  cast  in  more  than  any  one.     (4)  For    4 
all  they,  from  what  was  superfluous  to  them,  have 
cast  into  the  receptacle  of  oblations  to  God ;  but 
she,  from  her  penury,   hath  cast  in  all  that  she 
possessed. 

And  when  some  spoke  of  the  temple,  as  adorned     5 
with  goodly  stones  and  oblations,  Jesus  said   to 
them :  (6)  [As  for]  these  things,  on  which  ye  gaze,     6 
the  days  will  come,  in  which  there  will  not  be  left 
a  stone  upon  a  stone,  that  is  not  cast  down.    (7)  And     7 
they  questioned  him,   and   said :    Teacher,   when 
will  these  things  be  ?     And  what  is  the  sign  that 
they  are  near  to  take  place  ?     (8)  And  he  said  to     8 
them:    See,  that  yc  be  not  deceived;    for  many 
will  come  in  my  name,  and  will  say :  I  am  Messiah ; 
and  the  time  is  near.     But  go  ye  not  after  them. 
(9)  And  when  ye  shall  hear  of  wars  and  commo-     9 
tious,  be  not  afraid ;  for  these  things  arc  previously 


10  to  take  place,  but  the  end  is  not  yet  come.  (10)  For 
nation  will  rise  against  nation,  and  kingdom  against 

11  kingdom;  (11)  and  great  earthquakes  will  occur  in 
several  places,  and  famines,  and  pestilences;''  and 
there  will  be  terrors,  and  trepidations,  and  great  signs 
from  heaven  will  be  seen,  and  there  will  be  great 

12  tempests. — -(12)  But  before  all  these  things,  they 
will  lay  hands  upon  you,  and  will  persecute  you, 
and  will  deliver  you  up  to  councils^  and  to  prison, 
and  will  arraign  you  before  kings  and  governors, ^^ 

13  on  account  of  my  name.     (13)  But  it  will  be  to 

14  3'ou  for  a  testimony.  (14)  And  settle  it  in  your 
hearts,  that  ye  will  not  previously  seek  instruction 
for  making  a  defence.  (15)  For  I  will  give  you  a 
mouth  and  wisdom,  which  all  your  enemies  will 
be  unable  to  withstand.  (16)  And  j^our  parents, 
and  your  brothers,  and  your  relatives,  and  your 
friends,  will  deliver  you  up,  and  cause  some  of  you 
to  die.  (17)  And  ye  will  be  hated  by  every  one, 
on  account  of  my  name.     (18)  But  a  hair  of  your 

19  head  shall  not  perish.     (19)  And  b}'' your  patience, 

20  will  ye  preserve  your  souls. — (20)  And  when  ye 
shall  see  Jerusalem  with  an  army  encompassing  it, 
then  know  ye,  that  its  destruction  draweth  nigh. 
(21)  Then  let  them  who  shall  be  in  Juda?a,  flee  to 
the  mountain  [district] ;  and  let  them,  who  are  in 
the  midst  of  it,^  flee  away;  and  those  in  the  fields, 
not  enter  it.  (22)  For  these  are  days  of  vengeance, 
to  fulfill  all  that  is  written.  (23)  But  woe  to  them 
that  are  with  child,  and  to  them  that  nurse  chil- 
dren, in  those  days ;  for  then  will  be  great  distress 

24  in  the  land,'' and  wrath  upon  this  people.  (24)  And 
they  will  tall  by  the  edges'  of  the  sword,  and  be 
carried  captive  to  every  place.  And  Jerusalem 
will  be  trodden   down  by  the  Gentiles,  until  the 

25  times  of  the  Gentiles  shall  be  completed. — (25)  And 
there  will  be  signs  in  the  sun,  and  in  the  moon, 
and  in  the  stars;  and  distress  of  nations  on  the 
earth;  and  clasping  of  hands,  from  astonishment 

26  at  the  noise  of  the  sea;  (26)  and  dismay  that 
driveth  out  the  souls  of  men,  from  fear  of  that 
which  is  to  come  on  the  earth ;  and  the  powers'^ 

27  of  heaven  will  be  moved.  (27)  And  then  will 
they  see  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  the  clouds,  with 

28  much  power,  and  with  great  glory.  (28)  And 
when  these  things  shall  begin  to  be,  take  courage, 


15 
16 


17 

18 


21 


22 
23 


'  Sy.  mortalUies. 


or,  synagogues. 
'  Sy. 


^  i.  e.  Jerusalem. 


Sy.  earth. 
Sy.  mouth. 


or,  armies. 


154 


LUKE,   XXII. 


Sy.  lAoj 


Sy.  earth. 


'Sy.  "(j.^ 


29 

30 
31 

P.9. 


and  lift  up  your  heads,  for  your  deliverance  draw- 
eth  nigh. — (29)  And  he  uttered  a  similitude  to 
them.  Look  at  the  fig-tree,  and  all  the  trees. 
(30)  When  they  bud  forth,  ye  at  once  understand 
from  them,  that  summer  approacheth.  (81)  So  also, 
when  ye  shall  see  all  these  things  take  place,  know 
ye  that  the  kingdom  of  God  is  near.  (32)  Verily 
I  say  to  you,  That  this  generation'  will  not  pass 
away,  until  all  these  things  occur.  (33)  Heaven  33 
and  earth  will  pass  away ;  but  my  word  will  not 
pass""  away. — (34)  Take  heed  to  yourselves,  that  34 
your  hearts  be,  at  no  time,  stupefied  by  gluttony 
and  ebriety  and  worldly  care;  and  so  that  day 
come  upon  you  unawares.  (35)  For,  like  a  hunter's 
snare,  it  will  spring  upon  all  them  that  dwell  upon 
the  face  of  the  whole  land.^  (36)  Be  ye  there- 
fore vigilant,  at  all  times,  and  prayerful ;  that  ye 
may  be  worthy  to  escape  the  things  that  are  to 
take  place,  and  may  stand  before  the  Sou  of  man. 
— (37)  And,  in  the  daytime  he  taught  in  the  tem- 
ple, and  at  night  he  went  out  and  lodged  in  the 
mount,  called  the  Place  of  Olives.  (38)  And  all 
the  people  came  early  to  him  in  the  temple,  to  hear 
his  discourse. 


35 
36 


38 


And  the  feast  of  unleavened  cakes,  which  is  XXII. 
called  the  passover,  drew  near.     (2)  And  the  chief     2 
priests  and  Scribes  sought  how  they  might  kill 
him,  for  they  were  afraid  of  the  people.     (3)' And     3 
Satan*  entered  into  Judas  called  Iscariot,  who  was 
of  the  number  of  the  twelve.     (4)  And  he  went    4 
and  conferred  with  the  chief  priests  and  Scribes, 
and  the  military  commanders  of  the  temple,  how 
he  might  betray  him  to  them.     (5)  And  they  were     5 
glad,  and  covenanted  to  give  him  money.     (6)  And     6 
he  promised  them,  and  sought  opportunity  to  be- 
tray him  to  them,  in  the  absence  of  the  multitude. 

And  the  day  of  unleavened  cakes  arrivetl,  on     7 
which  it  was  customary  for  the  passover  to  be  slain. 
(8)  And  Jesus  sent  Cephas  and  John,  and  said  to     8 
them:  Go,  prepare  for  us  the  passover,  that  wc 
may  eat  it.     (9)  And  they  said  to  him:   Where     9 
wilt  thou,  that  we  prepare?     (10)  He  said  to  them :  10 
Lo,  when  ye  enter  the  city,  there  will  a  man  meet 
you,  bearing  a  vessel  of  water.     Go  after  him; 
(11)  and  where  he  entcrcth,  say  ye  to  the  lord  of  11 


LUKE,    XXII. 


155 


the  liouse :  Our  Rabbi  saith,  Is  there  a  place  of  re- 
freshment, in  which  1  may  eat  the  Passover,  with 

12  my  disciples?  (12)  And  lo,  he  will  show  you  a 
large  upper  room  that  is  furnished ;  there  prepare 

13  ye.  (13)  And  they  went,  and  found  as  he  had 
said  to  them:  and  they  made  ready  the  passover. 

14  — (14)  And  when  the  time  arrived,  Jesus  came 
and  reclined;  and  the  twelve  Legates''  with  him. 

15  (15)  And  he  said  to  them:  I  have  greatly  desired*^ 
to   eat  this  passover  with  you,    before   I  suffer. 

16  (16)  For  I  say  to  you,  That  henceforth  I  shall  not 
eat  it,  until  it  be  fulfilled  in  the  kingdom  of  God. 

17  (17)  [And  he  took  the  cup,  and  gave  thanks,  and 

18  said:  Take  this,  and  divide  it  among  j-ou.  (18)  For 
I  say  to  you.  That  I  shall  not  drink  of  the  product 
of  the  vine,  until  the  kingdom  of  God  shall  come.*] 
— (19)  And  he  took  bread,  and  gave  thanks,  and 
brake,  and  gave  to  them,  and  said:  This  is  my 
body,  which  is  given  for  j^our  sakes.  This  do  ye, 
in  remembrance  of  me.  (20)  And  in  like  manner 
also  concerning  the  cup,  after  they  had  supped,  he 
said:  This  cup  is  the  new  testamenf^  in  my  blood, 
which,  for  your  sakes,  is  poured  out! — (21)  But, 
behold,  the  hand  of  him  that  betra_yeth  me  is  on 

22  the  table.  (22)  And  the  Son  of  man  goeth,  as  it 
was  determined;  but  woe  to  that  man,  by  whom 
he  is  betrayed.  (23)  And  they  began  to  inquire 
among  themselves,  which  of  them  it  was,  that 
would  do  this. 

And  there  was  contention  also  among  them,  who 
among  them  would  be  greatest.  (25)  And  Jesus 
said  to  them :  The  kings  of  the  nations,  are  their 
lords;  and  those  exercising  authority  over  them, 
are  called  benefactors.  (26)  But  yc,  not  so:  but 
he  that  is  great  among  you,  must  be  as  the  least ; 
and  he  that  is  chief,  as  the  servitor.  (27)  For, 
which  is  the  greater,  he  that  roclineth,  or  he  that 
serveth?  Is  not  he  that  reclineth  ?  But  I  am 
among  j^ou,  as  he  that  serveth.     (28)  Ye  are  they 

29  who  have  continued  with  me  in  my  trials :  (29)  and 
I  promise  to  you,  as  my  Father  hath  promised  to 
me,  a  kingdom :  (30)  that  ye  may  eat  and  drink  at 
the  table  of  my  kingdom,  and  may  sit  on  thrones, 
and  judge  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel. 


19 


20 


21 


23 


24 
25 


26 

27 


28 


30 


or,  Apostles. 
Sy. 


Sy..»  O  .A  >> 


*  Adler  says,  verses  17,  18,  are  wanting  in  all  MSS.  of  the  Pesiiito. 


And  Jesus  said  to  Simon :  Simon,  lo,  Satan  liatb  31 
desired  to  sift  thee,   as  wheat:    (32)  but   I   have  32 
prayed  for  thee,  that  thy  faith  may  not  faih     And 
thou  also,  in  time,  turn ;  and  confirm  thy  brethren. 

(33)  And  Simon  said  to  him :  My  Lord,  with  thee  33 
I   am    ready,    both    for    prison    and    for   death. 

(34)  Jesus  said  to  him:    I  tell  thee,   Simon,  the  34 
cock  will  not  crow  this  day,  until  thou  hast  tliree 
times  denied  that  thou  knowest  me. — (35)  And  he  35 
said  to  them:  When  I  sent  you  without  purses, 
without  Avallets  and  shoes,  lacked  3'e  any  thing? 
The}^  say  to  him :  Nothing.     (36)  He  said  to  them :  36 
Henceforth,  let  him  that  hath  a  purse,  take  it ;  and 

so  likewise  a  wallet.  And  let  him  that  hath  no 
s\\^ord,  sell  his  garment,  and  buy  himself  a  sword. 
(37)  For  I  say  to  3^ou,  That  tliis  also,  which  was  37 
written,  must  be  fulfilled  in  me :  I  shall  be  num- 
bered with  transgressors.  For,  all  that  relates  to 
me,  will  be  fulfilled.  (38)  And  they  said  to  him:  38 
Our  Lord,  lo,  here  are  two  swords.  He  said  to 
them :  They  are  suflieient. 

And  he  went  out,  and  proceeded,  as  was  his  cus-  39 
torn,  to  the  mount  of  the  j)lace  of  Olives;  and  his 
disciples  followed  him.     (40)  And  when  he  arrived  40 
at  the  place,  lie  said  to  them :  Pray  ye,  that  ye  en- 
ter not  into  temptation.     (41)  And  he  retired  from  41 
them,  about  a  stone's  throw;  and  kneeled  down, 
and  prayed,  (42)  and  said :  Father,  if  it  please  thee,  42 
let  this  cup  pass  from  me.     Yet  not  my  ])leasure, 
but  thine,  be  done.     (43)  And  there  appeared  to  43 
him  an  angel  from  heaven,  who  strengthened  him. 
(44)  And  as  he  was  in  fear,  he  prayed  earnestly ;  44 
and  his   sweat  was  like   drops  of  blood;  and  it 
fell  on  the  ground.     (45)  And  he  arose  from  his  45 
prayer,  and  came  to  his  disciples:  and  he  found 
them  sleeping,  from  sorrow.     (46)  And  he  said  to  46 
them:  Why  sleep  ye?     Arise,  and  pra}',  lest  ye 
enter    into    temptation. — (47)  And  Avhile    he   was  47 
speaking,  lo,  a  maltitude,  and  he  that  was  called 
Judas,  one  of  the  twelve,  came  at  their  lu'ad.    And 
he  came  up  to  Jesus,  and  kissed  him.     For  he  had 
given  them  this  sign:  Whom  I  shall  kiss,  he  it  is. 
(48)  Jesus  said  "to  him:   Judas,   is  it  with  a  kiss  48 
thou  betraycst  the  Son  of  man  ?     (49)  And  when  49 
they  that  were  with  him,  saw  what  occurred,  they 
said  to  him :  Our  Lord,  shall  we  smite  them  with 


LUKE,    XXII. 


157 


52 


5-J: 


55 

56 
57 
58 


50  the  sword?  (50)  And  one  of  them  smote  a  ser- 
vant of  the  high  priest,  e  and  took  off  his  right  ear. 

51  (51)  And  Jesus  answered,  and  said:  Sufficient, 
thus  far.  And  he  touched  the  ear  of  him  that 
was  smitten,  and  healed  him. — (52)  And  Jesus 
said  to  those  who  had  come  upon  him, — the  chief 
priests  and  Elders  and  military  captains^  of  the 
temple :  Have  ye  come  out  against  me,  as  against 
a  robber,  Avith  swords,  and  with  clubs,  to  take  me  ? 
(53)  I  was  with  you  daily  in  the  temple,  and  ye 
laid  not  hands  upon  me.  But  this  is  your  hour, 
and  the  reign  of  darkness.  (54)  And  they  took 
him,  and  conducted  him  to  the  house  of  the  high 
priest.  And  Simon  followed  after  him,  at  a  dis- 
tance, (do)  And  they  kindled  a  fire  in  the  middle 
of  the  court,  and  sat  around  it;  and  Simon  also  sat 
among  them.  (56)  And  a  certain  maid  saw  him 
sitting  at  the  fire,  and  she  looked  upon  him,  and 
said :  This  man  also  was  with  him.  (57)  But  he 
denied,  and  said :  Woman,  I  have  not  known  him. 
(58)  And  a  little  after,  another  [person]  saw  him, 
and  said  to  him :  Thou  too  art  one  of  them.     And 

59  Cephas  said :  I  am  not.  (59)  And  an  hour  after, 
another  contended  and  said:  Certainly,  this  man 
also  was  with  him,  for  he  likewise  is  a  Galilean. 

60  (60)  Cephas  said:  Man,  I  know  not  what  thou 
sayest.  And  immediately,  while  he  was  speaking, 
the  cock  crew.  (61)  And  Jesus  turned,  and  looked 
upon  Cephas.  And  Simon  remembered  the  word 
of  our  Lord,  which  he  spoke  to  him :  Before  the 
cock  shall  crow,  thou  wilt  deny  me  three  times. 

(62)  And  Simon  went  out,   and  wept  bitterly. — 

(63)  And  the  men  who  had  taken  Jesus,  insulted 
64  him,  and  blinded  him,  (61:)  and  smote  him  on  his 

face,  and  said:  Prophesy  thou,  who  smote  thee? 
Q6  (65)  And  many  other  things  they  revilingly  ut- 
tered, and  spoke  against  him. 

66  And  when  the  day  dawned,  the  Elders  and  chief 
priests  and  Scribes  assembled  together ;  and  they 

67  led  him  to  the  place  of  their  meeting,  (67)  and  said 
to  him :  If  thou  art  the  Messiah,  tell  us.  He  said 
to  them :  If  I  tell  you,  ye  will  not  believe  in  me. 

68  (68)  And  if  I  should  ask  you,  ye  will  not  return 

69  me  an  answer ;  nor  will  ye  release  me.  (69)  From 
this  time,  the  Son  of  man  will  sit  on  the  right  hand 

70  of  the  majesty?  of  God.     (70)  And  they  all  said : 


61 


62 
63 


Sy. 


e  OT,  power. 


158 


LUKE,    XXIII. 


''  Sy.  worils. 
«Sy. 


^  Sy.  1ja2'>1 


Thou  art  then,  the  Son  of  God  ?     Jesus  said  to 
them:  Ye  say  that  I  am.     (71)  They  say:  What  71 
further  need  have  we  of  witnesses?     For  we  have 
heard  from  his  own  mouth. 

And  the  whole  company  of  them  arose,  and  XXIII. 
carried  him  before  Pilate.  =^     (2)  And  they  began     2 
to  accuse  him,  and  said :  We  have  found  this  man 
seducing  our  people,   and  forbidding  to  pay  the 
capitation  money  to  C«sar,  and  declaring  himself 
to  be  king  Messiah.     (3)  And  Pilate  interrogated     3 
him,  and  said  to  him :  Art  thou  king  of  the  Jews  ? 
He  said  to  him:  Thou  hast  said.     (4)  And  Pilate     4 
said  to  the  chief  priests  and  the  company :  I  find 
no  crime  upon  this  man.     (5)  And  they  vocifera-     5 
ted,  and  said :  He  raiseth  disturbance  among  our 
people,  by  teaching  in  all  Judaea,  commencing  from 
Galilee,  and  quite  to  this  ])lace.     (6)  And  Pilate,     6 
when  be  heard  the  name  Galilee,  inquired  if  the 
man  were   a  Galilean.     (7)  And  having   learned     7 
that  he  was  from  under  Herod's  jurisdiction,  he 
sent  him  to  Herod ;  for  he  was  at  Jerusalem  on 
those  days. — (8)  And  Herod  rejoiced  greatly  when     8 
he  saw  Je,'?us,  for  he  had  been  desirous  to  see  him 
for  a  long  time,  because  he  had  heard  many  things 
of  him,  and  he  hoped  to  see  some  sign  from  him. 
(9)  And  he  asked  him  many  questions;^  but  Jesus     9 
gave  him  no  reply.     (10)  And  the  chief  priests  10 
and  Scribes  stood  up,  and  accused  him  vehemently, 
(11)  And  Herod  and  hiswarriors^  contemned  him.  11 
And  when  he  had  mocked  him,  he  clothed  him  in 
a  purple  robe,  and  sent  him  to  Pilate.     (12)  And  12 
on  that  day,  Pilate  and  Herod  became  friends  to 
each  other ;  for  there  had  previously  been  enmity 
between  them. — (13)  And  Pilate  called  the  chief  13 
priests  and  the  rulers*^  of  the  people,  (14)  and  said  14 
to  them :  Ye  have  brought  this  man  before  me,  as  a 
disturber  of  your  people ;  and  lo,  I  have  examined 
him  before  you,  and  I  find  in  the  man  no  crime, 
among  all  that  3'-e  charge  upon  him.     (15)  Neither  15 
yet  Herod:  for  I  sent  him  to  him,  and  lo,  nothing 
deserving  death  hath  been  done  by  him.     (16)  I  16 
will   therefore  chastise  him,    and   release   him. — 
(17)  For  it  was  a  custom,  that  he  should  release  one  17 
at  the  festival. — (18)  And  all  the  company  vocifer-  18 
atcd,  and  said :  Away  with  this  man ;  and  release 


20 

21 
22 


23 


19  to  us  Barabbas.*^  (19)  He  was  one  wlio  liad  been 
thrown  into  prison,  on  account  of  a  sedition  and 
murder  which  had  occurred  in  the  citj.  (20)  And 
Pilate,  being  disposed  to  release  Jesus,  conversed 
with  them  again.  (21)  But  they  cried  out,  and 
said :  Crucify  him ;  crucify  him.  (22)  And  he 
said  to  them  the  third  time:  But,  what  evil  hath 
he  done?  I  find  no  crime  in  him  deserving  of 
death.  I  will  scourge  him,  therefore,  and  release 
him.  (23)  But  they  were  urgent,  with  a  loud 
voice ;  and  demanded  of  him,  that  they  might  cru- 

2-1  cify  him.     (24)  And  Pilate  decreed,  that  their  re- 

25  quest  be  granted.  (25)  And  he  released  to  them 
him,  who  for  sedition  and  murder  had^been  cast 
into  prison,  for  whom  they  petitioned  ;  and  he  de- 
livered up  Jesus  to  their  pleasure, 

26  And  as  they  led  him  away,  they  seized  Simon 
the  Cyrenian,  coming  from  the  fields,  and  laid  upon 

27  him  the  cross,  to  bear  [it]  after  Jesus.  (27)  And 
there  followed  after  him  a  great  multitude  of  peo- 
ple ;  and  those  women  [also]  who  wailed  and  la- 

28  mented  over  him.  (28)  And  Jesus  turned  to  them, 
and  said  to  them :  Daughters  of  Jerusalem,  weep 
not  for  me;  but  weep  rather  for  yourSelves,  and 

29  for  your  children.  (29)  For  lo,  the  days  are  com- 
ing, in  which  they  will  say:  Happy  the  barren, 
and  the  wombs  that  never  bore,  and  the  breasts 

80  that  never  nursed.  (30)  Then  will  they  begin  to 
say  to  the  mountains.  Fall  upon  us!  and  to  the 

31  hills,  Cover  us !  (31)  For  if  they  do  these  things 
in   a   green   tree,    what   will    be  in   the   dry? — 

32  (32)  And  there  went  along  with  him  two  others, 
malefactors,  to  be  crucified. 

33  And  when  they  came  to  a  certain  place  which  is 
called  a  Skull,^  they  crucified  him  there;  and  the 
two  malefactors,  the  one  on  his  right  hand,  and  the 

34  other  on  his  left.  (34)  And  Jesus  said:  Father, 
forgive  them;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do. 
And  they  divided  his  garments,  casting  a  lot  upon 

35  them.  (35)  And  the  people  stood  and  looked  on  -^ 
and  the  rulers?  also  derided  him,  and  said :  He 
quickened'^  others;  let  him  quicken  himself,  if  he 

36  is  the  Messiah,  the  chosen  of  God.  (36)  And  the 
soldiers  likewise  mocked  him,  coming  to  him  and 

37  offering  him  vinegar,  (37)  and  saying  to  him: 
K  thou  art  the  king  of  the  Jews,  quickeai  thyself 


«  Sy.  ]^]-^ 


Sy. 


^  Sy.  IjOiii") 

I'  Gr.  i(fu(fe. 


Gr.  tfw(J'ov. 


160 


LUKE,    XXIII. 


k  Sy.  l-m  .y,c^ 

'  or,  earth. 

^  Sy.  *j>_»j05 


Sv. 


.i"(^o\on 


(38)  And  there  was  likewise  a  superscription  over  38 
hira,  written  in  Greek,   and  Latin,  and  Hebrew : 
This  is  the  King  of  the  Jews. 

And  one  of  the  malefactors  who  were  crucified  39 
with   him,    reproached    him,    and  said:    If  thou 
art  the  Messiah,   rescue   thyself,   and  rescue   us. 
(40)  But  his  fellow  [malefactor]  rebuked  him,  and  40 
said  to  liim :  Art  thou  not  afraid  even  of  God,  see- 
ing thou  art  under  the  same  sentence?     (41)  And  41 
we  justly  ;  for  we  have  a  retribution  according  to 
our  deserts,  and  according  to  our  deeds ;  but  noth- 
ing hateful  hath  been  done  by  him.     (42)  And  he  42 
said  to  Jesus :  My  Lord,  remember  me,  when  thou 
comest  into  thy  kingdom.     (43)  Jesus  said  to  him :  43 
Verily  I  say  to  you.  That  this  day  thou  shalt  be 
with  me  in  paradise. i^ 

And  it  was  about  the  sixth  hour ;  and  darkness  44 
was   over   all    the    land,'    until    the    nintli   hour. 
(45)  And  the  sun  was  darkened,  and  the  curtain  of  45 
the  door  of  the  temple  was  rent  through  its  mid- 
dle.    (46)  And  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  46 
said :  My  Father,  into  thy  hand  I  commit  my  spirit."" 
Thus  he  spake,  and  expired.     (47)  And  when  the  47 
centurion   saw  what  occurred,  he   glorified   God, 
and  said:    Certainly,  this  was   a   righteous   man. 
(48)  And  all  the  multitudes  who  had  assembled  at  48 
this  spectacle,  on  seeing  what  occurred,  returned, 
smiting  upon  their  breasts.     (49)  And  there  were  49 
standing  at  a  distance,  all  they  that  knew  Jesus, 
and  those  women  who  came  with  him  from  Galilee ; 
and  they  beheld  these  things. 

And  there  was  a  certain  man,  whose  name  was  50 
Joseph,  a  counsellor,"  from  Eamath  a  city  of  Judtea, 
who  was  a  good  man  and  righteous;  (51)  and  he  51 
had  not  consented  to  their  decision  and  deed ;  and 
he  was  waiting  for  the  kingdom  of  God.    (52)  This  52 
man  went  to  Pilate,  and  begged  the  body  of  Jesus. 
(53)  And  he  took  it  down,  and  wrapped  it  in  a  53 
winding-sheet  of  linen;  and  laid  it  in  an  excava- 
ted sepulchre,  in  which  no  one  had  hitherto  been 
laid.     (54)  And   it  was  the  day  of  preparation,  54 
and  the  sabbath  began  to  dawn.     (55)  And  those  55 
women  who  came  with  him  from  Galilee,  approach- 
ed, and  viewed  the  sepulchre,  and  the  manner  in 
which  the  body  was  deposited.     (56)  And  they  56 
I  returned,  and  prepared  perfumes  and  aromatics; 


LUKE,    XXIV. 


161 


and  they  rested  on  the  sabbath,  as  it  is  command- 
ed. 

XXIV.  And  on  the  first  day  of  the  week,  in  the 
morning,  while  it  was  yet  dark,  they  came  to  the 
sepulchre,  and  brought  the  aromatics  they  had 
prepared.     And    there   were   other   women   with 

2  them.     (2)  And  they  found  the  stone  rolled  from 

3  the  sepulchre.     (3)  And  they  entered,  and  found 

4  not  the  body  of  Jesus.     (4)  And  as  they  wondered 
•  at  this,  behold,  two  men  stood  opposite  them ;  and 

5  their  raiment  was  effulgent.  (5)  And  they  were 
in  fear,  and  bowed  their  faces  to  the  ground.  And 
the  men  said  to  them :  Why  seek  ye  the  living 

6  among  the  dead  ?  (6)  He  is  not  here ;  he  is  risen. 
Remember  how  he  conversed  with  you,  when  he 

7  was  in  Galilee,  (7)  and  said.  That  the  Son  of  man 
was  to  be  delivered  into  the  hands  of  sinful  men, 
and  to  be  crucified,  and  to  rise  on  the  third  day. 

8  (8)   And   they  remembered   his  words. — (9)  And 

9  they  returned  from  the  sepulchre,  and  related  all 
these    things    to    the    eleven,    and    to    the    rest. 

10  (10)  Now  they  were  Mary  Magdalena,  and  Joan- 
na, ^  and  Mary  the  mother  of  James,  and  the  others 
with  them,  who  related  these  things  to  the  Legates.^ 

11  (11)  And  these  words  appeared  in  their  eyes  as 

12  dreams:  and  they  believed  them  not.  (12)  But 
Simon  arose,  and  ran  to  the  sepulchre,  and  looked 
in,  and  saAv  the  linen  lying  by  itself:  and  he  went 
away  wondering  in  himself  at  what  had  occurred. 

And  lo,  two  of  them,  on  the  same  day,  were 
going  to  a  village  named  Emmaus,"  distant  sixty 
furlongs'^  from  Jerusalem.  (14)  And  they  talked 
together  of  all  that  had  occurred.  (15)  And  as 
they  conversed,  and  questioned  each  other,  Jesus 
came,    and    drew   near,    and   walked   with   them. 

16  (16)  And  their  eyes  were  held,  that  they  did  not 

17  recognize  him.  (17)  And  he  said  to  them :  What  are 
these  discourses,  which  ye  hold  with  each  other,  as 

18  ye  walk  and  are  sad  ?    (18)  And  one  of  them,  whose 
•name  was  Cleopas,^  answered  and  said  to  him :  Art 

thou  only  a  stranger  in  Jerusalem,  that  thou  know- 
est  not  the  things  that  have  occurred  there  in  these 
days  ?  (19)  He  said  to  them :  What  things  ?  They 
say  to  him:  In  regard  to  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  a  man 
who  was  a  prophet,  and  mighty  in  discourse  and 


13 

14 
15 


19 


Sy.     joQ_» 
or,  Apostles. 


Sy.  »£Cc]iaL 
<>  Sy. 

Gr.  rfTacJia, 


Sy. 


162 


LUKE,    XXIV. 


in  action,  before  God,  and  before  all  the  people. 

(20)  And  the  chief  priests  and  Elders  delivered  20 
him  up  to  a  sentence  of  death,  and  crucified  him. 

(21)  But  we  expected  that  he  was  to  deliver  Israel.  21 
And  lo,  three  days  [have  passed],  since  all  these 
things    occurred.      (22)    And    moreover,    certain  22 
women  of  ours  astonished  us ;  for  they  went  early 

to  the  sepulchre ;  (23)  and  as  they  did  not  find  the  23 
body,  they  came  and  said  to  us :  We  saw  angels 
there,  and  they  said  that  he  is  alive.     (2-i)  And  24 
also  some  of  us  went  to  the  sepulchre ;  and  they 
found,  as  the  women  reported ;  but  him  they  saw 
not. — (25)  Then  Jesus  said  to  them:  0  deficient  in  25 
understanding,  and  slow  of  heart  to  believe  all  the 
things  that  the  prophets  uttered.     (26)  Were  not  26 
these  things  to  be ;  that  the  Messiah  should  suffer, 
and  that  he  should  enter  into  his  glory  ?     (27)  Then  27 
he  began  from  Moses,  and  from  all  the  prophets,  and 
expounded  to  them  concerning  himself  from  all  the 
scriptures.     (28)  And  they  drew  near  to  the  vil-  28 
lage  to  which  they  were  going;  and  he  made  them 
feel,  as  if  he  would  go  to  a  more  distant  place. 
(29)  And  they  urged  him,  and  said  to  him :  Tarry  29 
with  us,  for  the  day  inclineth  towards  dark.     And 
he  went  in  to   remain  with   them.     (30)  And  it  30 
occurred,  while  he  reclined  with  them,  that  he  took 
bread,  and  blessed,  and  brake,  and  gave  to  them. 

(31)  And  instantly,  their  eyes  were  opened,  and  31 
they  knew  him.     And  he  took  himself  from  them. 

(32)  And  they  said  one  to  another :  Did  not  our  32 
heart  burn*  within  us,  while  he  talked  with  us  by 
the  way,    and  explained  to  us  the  scriptures? — 

(33)  And  they  arose,  the  same  hour,  and  returned  33 
to  Jerusalem.     And  they  found  the  eleven  assem- 
bled, and  those  with  them,  (34)  who  were  saying :  34 
Certainly,  our  Lord  hath  risen;  and  he  hath  ap- 
peared to  Simon.     (35)  And  they  also  related  what  35 
occurred  by  the  way,  and  how  he  became  known 

to  them,  when  he  broke  bread. 

And  while  they  were  talking  of  these  things,  36 
Jesus  stood  in  the" midst  of  them,  and  said  to  them : 
Peace    be  with    you!     It  is  I;    be   not    afraid. 


*  The  printed  copies  read,  ^  «o  .  loCTI,  ions  burning ;  but  an  old  MS.  at 
Orooraiah  reads.  ;  «  n  ,  "joCTI  was  heavy,  or  dull. — Perkin^s  Residence  in  Persia, 
p.  IG. 


LUKE,    XXIV. 


163 


37  (37)  And  they  were  in  trepidation  and  fear,  for 

88  they  supposed  they  saw  a  spirit.^    (38)  Jesas  said 

to  them:    Wliy  are  ye  agitated?     And  Avhy  do 

39  imaginations?  arise  in  your  hearts?  (39)  Look  at 
my  hands  and  my  feet,  that  it  is  myself.  Handle 
me,  and  know;  for  a  spirit'^  hath  not  flesh  and 

40  bones,  as  ye  see  me  have.  (40)  And  as  he  said 
thus,   he   showed  them   his   hands  and  his  feet, 

41  (41)  And  while  they  still  believed  not,  for  their 
jo}',  and  were  astonished ;  he  said  to  them  :  Have 

42  ye  here  any  thing  to  eat?  (42)  And  they  gave 
him  a  piece  of  broiled  fish,   and  of  honeycomb. 

43  (43)     And    he    took,     [and]    ate    before    them.' 

44  (44)  And  he  said  to  them :  These  are  the  things'^ 
which  I  said  to  you  while  I  was  with  you,  That  all 
things  written  'of  me,  in  the  law  of  Moses  and  in 
the  prophets  and  in  the  psalms,  must  be  fulfilled. 

45  (45)  Then  he  opened  their  mind  to  understand  the 

46  scriptures.  (46)  And  he  said  to  them :  Thus  it 
is  written,  and  thus  it  Avas  right^  for  Messiah  to 
suffer,  and  rise  from  the  dead  on  the  third  day ; 

47  (-17)  and  that,  in  his  name,  repentance  for  the  re- 
mission of  sins  should  be  preached  among  all 
nations,  and  that  the  commencement  be  at  Jeru- 

48  salem.      (48)   And  ye  are  the  witnesses  of  these 

49  things.  (49)  And  I  will  send  upon  you  the  promise 
of  my  Father.  But  remain  ye  at  Jerusalem,  until 
ye  shall  be  clothed  v/ith  energy"'  from  on  high. 

50  And  he  led  them  out  as  iar  as  Bethan}^,  and 
61  lifted  his  hands,   and  blessed  them.      (51)   And 

it  occurred,  while   he  blessed  them,  that  he  was 
separated  from  them,    and  ascended  to  heaven. 

52  (52)  And  they  worshipped  him,  and  returned  to 

53  Jerusalem  with  great  joy.  (53)  And  they  were  con- 
tinually in  the  temple,  praising  and  blessing  God. 

Amen. 


Comfletion  of  the  liolij  Gospel"  of  Luke  the  Evangelist.^ 


'  Sy.  Ui05 

^  or,  thoughts. 
^  Sy.  ]ja05 


'  Sy.  their  eyes. 
''or,  words. 


Sy.  *D5l 


Sy.]] 


oy.  IJ.BJJ 


Sy. 
Sy. 


IjJdIo      ^"^idDj      llO^      ^_J_KjQ_,J      Uop;^      |jLjr-0      ^Q-A^o] 

The  Holy  Gospel,  tlic  Proclamation  of  John  the  Herald ; 

wliii'li  he  uttered  and  proclaimed,  in  Greek,  at  Ephesus. 


'Sy.A»  ■  i;*~) 

••  Sy.  IzWLd 

<=  Sy.  \L^ 
<*  Sy.  "jJaiQJ 


<=Sy.VL4lQ_, 
f  Sy.  OfX^Z] 
e  Sy.  "jl  in. 
>■  Sy. 

I*  Sy.  ]mnVni 
'  Sy.  13^ 


I. 


In  the  beginning,^  was  the  Word;b  r^nd  the 
Word  was  with  God;  and  the  Word  was  God. 
(2)  He  was  in  the  beginning  with  God.  (3)  Every 
thing  was  by  his  hand ;  and  without  him,  was  not 
any  thing  whatever  that  existed,  (-i)  In  him  was 
Hfe;'=  and  the  life  was  the  ]ight<^  of  man.  (5)  And 
this  hght  shineth  in  the  darkness;  and  the  dark- 
ness apprehended  it  not. — (6)  There  was  a  man 
sent  from  God,  whose  name  was  John.  (7)  He 
came  for  tcstimon}-,  to  bear  witness  concerning  the 
hght.  (8)  He  was  not  himself  the  light,  but  [came] 
to  bear  witness  concerning  the  light. — (9)  The  true 
light  was  that,  which  enlighteneth  every  man  who 
Cometh  into  the  world.  (10)  He  was  in  the  world  ;  10 
and  the  world  was  by  his  hand;  and  the  world  did 
not  know  him.  (11)  He  came  to  his  own  [people] ;  11 
and  his  own  [people]  received  him  not.  (12)  But  12 
sucli  as  received  him,  to  them  gave  he  the  pre- 
rogative^  to  be  children  of  God ;  [even]  to  them 
that  believe  on  his  name ;  (13)  Avho  are  born,^  not 
of  blood,  nor  of  the  pleasures  of  the  flesh,  nor  of 
the  pleasure  of  man,  but  of  God. — (14)  And  the 
Word  became  flesh,  ^  and  tabernacled  with  us : 
and  Ave  saw  his  glory,  a  glory  as  of  the  only  be- 
gotten' from  the  Father,  that  he  was  full  of  grace 
and  truth.  (15)  John  testified  of  him,  and  cried,  15 
and  said:  This  is  he,  of  whom  I  said.  That  he 
Cometh  after  me,  and  is  before  me;  for  he  was 
prior  to  me.  (16)  And  of  his  plenitude  have  we  16 
all  received,  and  grace  for  grace.  (17)  For  the  17 
lawk  -y^yg  (riven  by  the  hand  of  ]\Ioses ;  but  the 
reality'  and  grace  was  by  the  haud  of  Jesus  Mes- 


13 


U 


JOHN,    I. 


165 


18  siah.  (18)  No  man  bath  ever  seen  God ;  tlie  only 
begotten  God,  be  wbo  is  in  the  bosom  of  bis  Father, 
be  bath  declared  [him]. 

19  And  tbis  is  the  testimony  of  John,  when  the 
Jews  of  Jerusalem  sent  to  bim  priests  and  Levites, 

20  to  ask  him,  Who  art  ti)ou?  (20)  And  be  confessed, 
and  denied  not,  bat  confessed  :  I  am  not  the  Mes- 

21  siab.  (21)  And  they  asked  bim  again  :  Wbo  then  ? 
Art  tbou  EUjab?     And  be  said:  I  am  not.     Art 

22  tbou  a  propiict?  And  be  said,  No.  (22)  And 
tbey  said  to  biui:  Wbo  art  thou?  that  we  may 
give  answer  to  them  that  sent  us.     What  sayest 

23  tbou  of  thyself?  (28)  He  said :  I  am  the  voice  of 
one  crying  in  the  wilderness.  Make  smooth  the 
way  of  the   Lord ;    as   said    the   prophet    Isaiah. 

24  (24)  And  they  who  were  vSent,  were  of  the  Pliari- 

25  sees.  (25)  And  they  asked  him,  and  said  to  him  : 
Why  then   baptizest'"   tbou,   if  thou  ai't   not   the 

26  Messiah,  nor  Elijab,  nor  a  prophet?  (2())  John 
answered,  and  said  to  them;  I  bai)ti/ewith  water; 
but  among  you  standetb   one,   wliom  ye  do   not 

27  know.  (27)  lie  it  is  that  coraeth  after  me,  and 
was  before  me,  whose  shoe-strings  I  am  not  worthy 

28  to  untie.     (28)  These  things  occurred  in  Bethany," 

29  where  John  was  baptizing. — (29)  The  da}--  after, 
John  saw  Jesus  coining  towards  bim,  and  said  : 
Behold,  the  Lamb  of  God,  that  beareth  the  sin  of 

30  the  world.  (30)  This  is  be  of  whom  I  said,  After 
me  Cometh  a  man,  wbo  is  before  me,  for  be  was 

31  prior  to  me.  (31)  And  I  knew  bim  not;  but  that 
he  might  be  known  to  Israel,  therefore  am  I  come 

32  baptizing  with  water.  (32)  And  John  testified, 
and  said:  I  saw  the  Spirit  descend  from  heaven, 

33  as  a  dove,o  and  rest  upon  bim.  (33)  And  I  did 
not  know  him;  but  be  wbo  sent  me  to  baptize 
with  water,  be  said  to  me:  On  wbom  tbou  seest 
the  Spirit  descend,  and  rest  upon  bitn,  be  baptizetb 

34  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  (34)  And  I  saw;  and  I 
testify,  that  this  is  the  Son  of  God. 

35  And  the  next  day,  John  was  standing,  and  two 

36  of  bis  disciples.  (36)  And  he  h)oked  upon  Jesus 
as  he  walked,  and  said :  Behold,  the  Lamb  of  God ! 

37  (37)    And  bis  two  disciples  beard    bim  when  be 

38  said  [it],  and  tbey  went  after  Jesus.  (38)  And  Je- 
sus turned,  and  saw  them  coming  after  bim,  and  be 
said  to  them:    What  seek  ye?     Tbey  said  to  him: 


■  Sy. 


Sy.- 


Sy. 


166 


JOHN,    11. 


P  Sy.'^Kj.AlO 


•  Sy.  tnthjason 
cf  Israel. 


"  Sy. 


Sy-M^ 


Sy.  ^-jlLC)? 

=  Ijiit.  qaad- 
rantalia,  or 
amphora: ; 
wine-jars. 


Our  Rabbi,  where  stajest  thou  ?     (39)  Ue  said  to  39 
them:  Come,  and  sec.     And  they  came  and  saw 
where  he  lodged;  and  they  were  with  him  that 
day,  for  it  was  about  the  tenth  hour.     (40)  And  40 
one  of  those  who  heard  John  and  went  after  Jesus, 
was  Andrew,  the  brother  of  Simon.     (41)  He  first  41 
saw  Simon  his  brother,  and  said  to  him:  We  have 
found  the  Messiah. p     (42)  And  he  brought  him  to  42 
Jesus.     And  Jesus  looked  upon  him,  and  said: 
Thou  art  Simon  the  son  of  Jona;  thou  shalt  be 
called  Cephas. — (43)  The  next  day,  Jesus  was  dis-  43 
posed  to  depart  for  Galilee:  and  he  found  PhiHp, 
and  said  to  him.  Come  after  me.     (44)  And  Philip  44 
was  of  Bethsaida,  the  city  of  Andrew  and  Simon. 
(45)  And  Phili]i  found  Nathaniel,  and  said  to  him:  45 
We  have  found  him,  of  whom  Moses  wrote  in  the 
law,  and  the  propliets,  Jesus  the  son  of  Joseph,  who 
is  of  JSTtizareth.     (46)  Nathaniel  said  to  him :  Can  46 
there  be  any  good  thing  from  Nazareth?  Philip 
said  to  him:  Come,  and  see.     (47)  And  Jesus  saw  47 
Nathaniel  coming  towards  him,  and  said  of  him: 
Behold'  a  real   Israelite,'"  in  whom  is  no  deceit. 

(48)  Nathaniel  said  to  him :  Whence  knowest  thou  48 
me?    Jesus  said  to  him  :  Before  Pliilip  called  thee, 
when  thou  wast  under  the  fig-tree,  I   saw  thee. 

(49)  Nathaniel  answered,  and  said  to  him :  Rabbi,  49 
thou  art  the  Son  of  God;^  thou  art  the  King  of 
Israel.     (50)  Jesus  said  to  him:  Because  I  said  to  50 
thee,  that  I  saw  thee  under  the  fig-tree,  believest 
thou?     Thou  wilt  see  greater  things  than  these. 
(51)  lie  said  to  him :  Verily,  verily,  I  say  to  you,  51 
That  hereafter  ye  will  see  heaven  opened,  and  the 
angels  of  God  ascending  and  descending  unto  the 
Son  of  man. 

And  on  the  third  day  there  Avas  a  feast  in  Cana,^  11. 
a  city  of  Galilee:    and  the  mother  of  Jesus  was 
there.     (2)  And  also  Jesus  and  his  disciples  were     2 
invited  to  the  feast.     (3)  And  the  wine  fell  short:     3 
and  his  mother  said  to  Jesus:  They  have  no  wine. 
(4)  Jesus  said  to  her :  What  is  [in  conunon]  tome     4 
and  thee  ?     Not  yet  hnth  my  hour  come.     (5)  His     5 
mother  said  to  the  waiters:   Whatever  he  saith  to 
you,  do  [it].     (6)  And  there  were  there  six  water-     6 
pots  of  stone,  set  for  the  purification  of  Jews,  con- 
taining each  two  or  three  quadrantalia."*     (7)  Jesus     7 


JOHN,    II. 


167 


said  to  them :    Fill  those  water-pots  with  water. 

8  And  they  iilled  them  to  the  top.  (8)  He  said  to 
them :  Draw  now,  and  carry  to  the  master''  of  the 

9  feast.  And  they  carried.  (9)  And  when  the  mas- 
ter of  the  feast  tasted  the  water  that  had  become 
wine,  and  did  not  know  whence  it  came,  (although 
the  waiters  knew,  as  they  had  filled  the  pots  with 
Avater,)  the  master  of  the  feast  called  the  bride- 

10  groom,  (10)  and  said  to  him:  Every  man  first 
bringeth  forward  the  good  wine,  and  when  they 
are  satiated,  then  that  which  is  inferior ;  but  thou 

11  hast  kept  the  good  wine  till  now.  (11)  This  is  the 
first  sign-fi  which  Jesus  wrought  at  Cana  in  Galilee, 
and  manifested  his  glory  :  and  his  disciples  be- 
lieved on  him. 

12  Afterwards  he  went  down  to  Caj)ernaum,  he  and 
his  mother  and  his  brothers  and  his  disciples;  and 

13  they  were  there  a  few  daj's.  (13)  And  the  pass- 
over  of  the  Jews  drew  near ;  and  Jesus  went  up  to 

14  Jerusalem.  (11:)  And  he  found  in  the  temple  those 
who  sold  beeves  and  sheep  and  doves,  and   the 

15  money-changers  sitting  [there].  (15)  And  he  made 
himself  a  whip  from  a  cord,  and  turned  them  all 
out  of  the  temple,  and  the  sheep  and  the  beeves 
and  the  money-changers ;  and  he  poured  out  their 

16  mone}'',  and  overset  their  tables :  (10)  and  he  said 
to  them  that  sold  doves,  Take  away  these  things; 
and  make  not  my  Father's  house  a  house  of  traffic. 

17  (17)  And  his  disciples  remembered,  that  it  is  writ- 
ten :   The  zeal  of  thy  house  hath  devoured  me. 

18  (18)  But  the  Jews  replied,  and  said  to  him :  What 
sign   showest  thou  to  us,  since  thou  doest  these 

19  things?  (19)  Jesus  answered,  and  said  to  them: 
Demolish  this  temple,   and  in  three  days  I  will 

20  again  erect  it.  (20)  The  Jews  said  to  him  :  Forty 
and  six  years,  this  temple  was  building ;  and  wilt 

21  thou  build  it  again  in  three  days?     (21)  But  he 

22  sp;dvc  of  the  temple  of  his  body.e  (22)  And  when 
he  was  arisen  from  the  dead,  his  disciples  remem- 
bered, thiit  he  spoke  this:  and  they  believed 
the  scriptures,  and  the  word  that  Jesus  spake, — 

23  (23)  And  while  Jesus  was  in  Jerusalem,  at  the 
feast  of  the  passover,  many  believed  on  him,  •be- 

21  cause  they  saw  the  signs   he  wrought.    (21)  But 

Jesus  did^not  confide  himself  to  them  ;  because  he 

25  knew  all  men :  (25)  And  he  needed  not  that  any 


sy-Ul 


Sy.cn 


^ 


168 


JOHN,    III. 


Sy.  "Ijodj") 


5>  ^1d 


'  Sy.  "jjoOJ 
*  Sy.  "^jOJ 
f  Sy.  ]i<^\^ 


KSy. 

"  Sy.  U' 


Sy.  /;;/  /iis 
liaiid. 


one  should  testify  to  liim  respecting  any  man ;  for 
he  himself  knew  what  is  in  man. 

And  there  was  a  man.  of  the  Pharisees  there,  III 
whose  name  was  Nicodemus,  a  ruler^  of  the  Jews. 
(2)  And  he  came  to  Jesus  by  night,  and  said  to     ^ 
him :  liabbi,  we  know  that  thou  art  a  teacher  sent 
from  God ;  for  no  one  can  work  those  signs  which 
thou  workest,  unless  God  be  with  him.     (3)  Jesus     i 
replied,  and  said  to  him:  Verily,  verily,  I  say  to 
thee,  That,  unless  a  man  be  born''  anew,'=  he  can- 
not behold  the  kingdom  of  God.     (-i)  Nicodemus     4 
said  to  him :  How  can  an  old  man  be  born  ?     Can 
he  enter  a  second  time  into  his  mother's  womb, 
and  be  born  ?     (5)  Jesus  replied,  and  said  to  him :     C 
Verily,  verily,  I  say  to  thee,  That,  unless  a  man  be 
born  of  water  and  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  the 
kingdom  of  God.     (6)  That  which  is  born  of  the 
flesh,  is  flesh;  and  that  which  is  born  of  the  Spirit, 
is  spirit.     (7)  Be  not  surprised  that  I  said  to  thee, 
Ye  must  be  born  anew.     (8)  The  wind^  bloweth, 
where  it  chooseth;  and  thou  hearest  its  sound,  but 
knowest   not  whence  it   cometh,   and  whither   it 
goeth :  so  is  every  one,  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit." 
(9)  Nicodemus  answered,  and  said  to  him:  IIow 
can  these  things  be?     (10)  Jesus  answered,  and  10 
said  to  him :  Art  thou  a  teacher^  of  Israel,  and 
knowest  not  these  things?     (11)  Verily,  verily,  I  11 
say  to  thee :  We  speak,  what  we  know ;  and  we 
testify  to  what  we  have  seen ;  but  ye  receive  not 
our  testimony.     (12)  If  I  have  spoken  to  you  of  12 
things  on  earth,  and  ye  believe  not;  how  will  ye 
believe,  if  I  speak  of  things  in  heaven?     (13)  And  13 
no  one  hath  ascended  to  heaven,  but  he  that  de- 
scended from  heaven,  the  Son  of  man  who  is  in 
heaven.     (11)  And  as  Moses  elevated  the  serpent  11 
in  the  wilderness,  so  must  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted 
u]):   (15)  that  every  one  Avho  believeth   in   him,  15 
may    not    perish,     but    may   have    life    eternal.? 

(16)  For  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  16 
only  begotten^  Son,  that  whosoever  .believeth  on 
him,  should  not  perisli,  but  should  have  life  eternal. 

(17)  For  God  sent  not  his  Son  into  the  world,  to  17 
condemn  the  world;  but  that  the  world  might  live 

by  means'  of  him.     (18)  Ue  that  believeth  on  him,   18 
is  not  condemned;  but  he  that  believeth  not,  is 


9 


JOHN,    III. 


169 


already  condemned;  because  he  hath  not  believed 
on   the  name  of  the  only  begotten   Son  of  God. 

19  (19)  And  this  is  the  [ground  of]  condemnation, 
that  light  hath  come  into  the  world,  and  men  have 
loved  darkness  rather  than  light,  for  their  deeds 

20  have  been  evil.  (20)  For  every  one  that  doeth 
abominable  things,  hateth  the  light,  and  cometh 
not  to  the  light,  lest  his  deeds  should  be  reproved. 

21  (21)  But  he  that  doeth  right,k  cometh  to  the  hght, 
that  his  works  may  be  known  to  be  done  in  God. 

22  After  these  things,  came  Jesus  and  his  disci])les 
into  the  land  of  Jud«a;  and  there  he  abode  with 

23  them,  and  baptized.  (23)  And  John  also  was 
baptizing  in  -^Enon,i  which  is  near  to  Saliui,'"  be- 
cause  there   were    many   waters   there :    and    the 

21:  people  came,  and  were  baptized,     (21)  F(jr  John 

25  had  not  yet  fallen  into  prison. — (25)  And  one  of 
John's  disciples  and  a  certain  Jew  had  disputed 

26  respecting  purification. — (26)  And  they  came  to 
John,  and  said  to  him:  Our  Kabbi,  he  wlio  was 
Avith  thee  beyond  Jordan,  and  of  whom  thou  gavest 
testimony,  lo,  he  also  baptizeth;  and  many-go  after 

27  him.  (27)  John  answered,  and  .^aid  to  them:  A 
man  cannot  take  any  thing  by  his  own  choice,  un- 

28  less  it  be  given  him  from  heaven.  (28)  Ye  are 
witnesses  for  me,  that  I  said :  I  am  not  tiie  Messiah, 

29  but  am  sent  to  go  bef(.)re  him.  (29)  lie  that  iiath 
the  bride,  is  the  bridegroom:  and  the  friend  of  the 
bridegroom,  who  standeth  and  listeneth  to  him, 
rejoiceth  with  great  joy  on  account  of  tlu^  bride- 
groom's voice :  this  my  joy,  therefore,  lo,  it  is  full. 

30  (30)  To  him  must  be  increase,  and  to  me  decrease. 

31  (31)  For  he  that  cometh  from  above,  is  above  all ; 
and  he  that  is  from  the  earth,  is  of  the  earth,  and 
talketh  of  the  earth.     lie  that  cometh  from  heaven, 

32  is  above  all ;  (32)  and  what  he  hath  seen  and  heard, 
he  testifieth;  and  his  testimony,  no  one  receivetb. 

33  (33)  But  he  that  receiveth  his  testimony,  hath  set 

34  his  seal,  that  God  is  true.  (34)  For  he  wdiom  God 
hath  sent,  speaketh  the  words  of  God ;  for  God 
hath   not  given  the  Spirit  by  measure  [to  him]. 

35  (35)  The  Father  loveth  the  Son,  and  hath  given 

36  every  thing"  into  his  hands.  (36)  He  that  be- 
lieveth  on  the  Son,  hath  life  eternal ;  but  he  who 
obeyeth  not  the  Son,  shall  not  see  life,  but  the 
wrath  of  God  will  abide  upon  him. 


sy- 15; 


•  Sy.  ,CL. 


y.  :>o»\t> 


Sy. 


Sy. 


Sy. 


Sy. 


lilD 


And  Jesus  knew,  that  the  Pharisees  had  heard  IV. 
that  he  made  many  disciples,  and  baptized  more 
than  John.     (2)  Yet  Jesus  himself  did  not  baptize,     2 
but  his  disciples.      (3)   And  he  left  Judaea,  and     3 
went  again  into  Galilee.     (4)  And  in  going,  he  had     4 
occasion  to  pass  through  the  midst  of  the  Samari- 
tans.    (5)  And  he  came  to  a  city  of  the  Samaritans     5 
called  S3'char,=i  near  the  field  which  Jacob  gave  to 
his  son  Joseph.      (6)   And  Jacob's  well  of  water     G 
was  there.     iVnd  Jesus  was  Aveary  with  the  toil  of 
travelling,  and  seated  himself  by  the  well :  and  it 
was  at  the  sixth  hour.     (7)  And  a  woman  from     7 
Samaria  came  to  draw  water.     And  Jesus  said  to 
her:  Give  me  Avater  to  drink.     (8)  And  his  disci-     8 
pies  had  gone  to  the  city,  to  buy  themselves  food. 
(9)  The  Samaritan  woman  said  to  him:  IIov/  dost     9 
thou,  a  Jew,  ask  drink  of  me,  who  am  a  Samaritan 
woman?     For  the  Jews  have  no  Himiliarity  with 
Samaritans.     (10)  Jesus  replied  and  said  to  her :  10 
If  thou  hadst  known  the  gift''  of  God,  and  who  it 
is  that  saith    to   thee,    Give   me   to   drink,  thou 
wouldest  have  asked  of  him,  and  he  would  have 
given  thee  living  waters.*^     (11)  The  woman  said  11 
to  him :    My  lord,  thou  hast  no  bucket,  and  the 
well    is    deep;    how    hast    thou    living    waters? 
(12)  Art  thou  greater  than  our  father  Jacob,  who  12 
gave  us  this  well,  and  drank  from  it  himself,  and 
his  children,  and  his  flocks?     (13)  Jesus  replied  13 
and  said  to  her:    Whoever  shall  drink  of  these 
waters,  will  thirst  again  ;    (14)  but  whoever  shall  14 
drink  of  the  waters  which  I  shall  give  him,  will  not 
thirst  for  ever;  but  the  waters,  which  I  shall  give 
him,  will  be  in  him  a  fountain  of  waters,  spi'inging 
up  unto  life  eternal.    (15)  The  woman  said  to  hiin:  15 
My  lord,  give  me  of  these  waters,  that  I  may  not 
thirst  again,  and  may  not  come  to  draw  from  here. 
(16)  Jesus  said  to  her:  Go,  call  thy  husband,  and  16 
come  hither.     (17)  She  said  to  him:    I  have  no   17 
husband.     Jesus  said  to  her:  Thou  hast  well  said, 
I  have  no  husband ;  (18)  for  thou  hast  had  five  18 
husbands,  and  he  whom  thou  now  hast,  is  not  thy 
husband.    In  this  thou  didst  speak  truly.    (19)  The  19 
woman  said  to  him:  My  lord,  I  perceive  thou  art 
a  prophet.     (20)  Our  fathers  worshipped  in  this  20 
mountain;    but  ye  say,  that  in  Jerusalem   is  the 
place  where  it  is  proper  to  worship.     (21)  Jesus  21 


JOHN,    IV. 

said  to  her:  Womnn,  believe  me,  the  hour  cometh, 
when  neither  in  this  mountain,  nor  in  Jerusalem, 

22  jQ  will  worship  the  Father.  (22)  Ye  worship,  ye 
know  not  what;  but  Ave  worship  what  we  know; 

23  for  life^  is  from  the  Jews.  (28)  Bat  the  hour 
cometh,  and  now  is,  when  the  true  worshippers 
will  Avorship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  in  truth ;  for 
the    Father   requireth   that   Avorshippers  be  such. 

24  (24)  For  God  is  a  Spirit;  and  they  that  Avorship 

25  him,  should  Avorship  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  (25)  The 
Avoman  said  to  him:  I  know  that  Messiah  will 
come ;  and  Avhen  he  cometh,  he  Avill  teach  us  every 

26  thing.     (26)  Jesus  said  to  her:  I,  Avho  talk  with 

27  thee,  am  he, — (27)  And  while  he  was  speaking,  his 
disciples  came.  And  they  wondered  tiiat  he  would 
converse  with  the  Avoman ;  yet  no  one  said,  What 
seekest  thou?    or.  Why  talkest   thou  Avith  her? 

28  (28)  And  the  Avoman  left  her  Avater-pot,  and  Avent 

29  to  the  city,  and  said  [to  ths  people]  :  (29)  Come, 
see  a  man  that  told  me  every  thing  I  ev'er  did:  is 

30  not  this  the  Messiah?     (30)  x\nd  the  people  went 

31  out  of  the  city,  and  came  to  him. — (31)  In  the  mean 
time,  his  disciples  entreated  him,  and  said  to  him : 

82  Our  Kabbi,  eat.     (32)  But  he  said  to  them  :  I  liave 

33  food  to  eat,  of  Avhich  ye  are  ignorant.  (33)  The 
disciples  said  among  tliernselves :    liath  any  one 

34  brought  him  something  to  eat  ?  (34)  Jesus  said  to 
them :  My  food  is  to  do  the  pleasure  of  him  that 

35  sent  me,  and  to  accrJmplish  his  work.  (35)  Do  ye 
not  say,  that  after  four  months  cometh  tlie  harvest? 
Behold,  I  say  to  you,  and  lift  up  your  eyes,  and 
look  upon  the  grounds,"  that  they  are  white,  and 

36  have  already  come  to  the  harvest.  (36)  And  he 
that  reapeth,  receiveth  Avages,  and  gathereth  fruits 
unto  life  eternal;   and  the  sower  and  the  reaper 

37  equally  rejoice.  (37)  For  in  this,  is  the  proverb^ 
ti'ue,  that  one  is  the  sower,  and  another  the  reaper. 

38  (38)  I  sent  you  to  reap  that,  on  which  ye  labored 
not:    for  others  toiled,  and  ye  entered  into  their 

39  labor. — (39)  And  many  Samaritans  of  that  cit}^ 
believed  on  him,  because  of  the  discourse  of  the 
Avoman,  Avho  testified,  He  told  me  all  that  I  ever 

40  did.  (40)  And  when  these  Samaritans  came  to 
hiin,  they  requested  him  to  tarry  with  them;  and 

41  he  remained  with  them  two  days.    (41)  And  many 

42  believed  on  him,  becausj  of  his  discourse.    (42)  And 


171 


'^  Gr.  tfwrrjpj'a. 


^  or,  lands. 


'  Sy.  word. 


172 


JOHN,    V. 


e  Sy. 
Gr.  djjTr.p. 


Sy. 
Sy. 

Sy.  7«!(6-/j  /.ICO- 

])le. 


they  said  to  the  woman:  Henceforth  we  believe  in 
him,  not  on  account  of  thy  word ;  for  we  have 
heard  him  ourselves,  and  we  know  that  he  truly  is 
the  Mes.siah,  the  Life-Givers  of  the  world. 

And  after  two  days  Jesus  departed  from  there,  43 
and  went  into  Galilee.     (44)    For  Jesus  himself  44 
testilied,  that  a  prophet  is  not  honored  in  his  own 
city.     (45)    And   when   he  came   to  Gahlee,  the  45 
Galileans  received  him,  having  seen  all  the  signs 
which  he  wrought  in  Jerusalem  at  the  feast ;  for 
they  too  had  gone  to  the  feast. — (46)  And  Jesus  46 
came  again  to  Cana  of  Galilee,  where  he  made  the 
water  wine.   And  there  was  at  Capernaum  a  king's 
servant,  whose  son  was  sick.     (47)  He  heard  that  47 
Jesus  had  come  from  Judica  to  Galilee;  and  he 
went  to  him,  and  besought  him  that  he  would  come 
down  and  heal  his  son;  for   he  was  near  dj'ing. 
(48)  Jesus  said  to  him:  Unless  ye  see  signs  and  48 
wonders,   ye  will   not  believe.      (49)    The   king's  49 
servant  said  to  him:  My  lord,  come  down,  before 
the  child  dieth.     (50)  Jesus  said  to  him :  Go,  thy  50 
son  liveth.    And  the  man  believed  the  word  which 
Jesus  spake  to  him,  and  went  away.     (51)  And  ns  51 
he  was  going  down,  his  servants  met  him,  and  in- 
formed him   and  said   to    him :    Thy    son   liveth. 
(52)  And  he  asked  them,  at  what  lime  he  recovered.  52 
And  they  said  to  him :  Yesterday,  at  the  seventh 
hour  the  fever  left  him.    (53)  And  his  father  knew,  53 
that  it  was  at  the  hour  in  Avhich  Jesus  said  to  him. 
Thy  son   liveth.      Ami    ho  believed,   and    all  his 
house.     (54)  This  again  was  the  second  sign  that  54 
Jesus   wrouglit,  when   he   came  from   Judaea   to 
Galilee. 

After  these  things  there  was  a  feast  of  the  Jews,  Y. 
and  Jesus  went  up  to  Jerusalem.    (2)  And  there  was     2 
there  in  Jerusalem  a  certain  place  of  baptizing, a- 
which  was  called  in  Hebrew  Bethesda;^  and  tlu>re 
were  in  it  five  porches.    (3)  And  in  them  were  laid  a     3 
great  multitude'^  of  the  sick,  and  the  blind,  and  the 
lame,  and  the  withered,  waiting  for  the  moving  of 
the  waters.    (4)  For  an  angel,  from  time  to  time,  de-     4 
scended  into  the  baptistery,  and  moved  the  waters; 
and  he  who  first  went  in,  after  the  moving  of  the 
waters,  was  cured   of  whatever  disease    he    h;id. 
(5)  And  a  certain  man  was  there,  who  had  been     5 


JOHN,    V. 


173 


6  diseased  thirty  and  eight  years.  (6)  Jesus  saw 
him  lying,  and  knew  that  [his  disease]  had  been  a 
long  time  upon  him,   and  said  to  him :  Desirest 

7  thou  to  be  healed  ?  (7)  And  the  sick  man  answered 
and  said :  Yes,  my  lord ;  but  I  have  no  one  who, 
when  the  water  is  moved,  will  put  me  into  the 
baptistery;  but  while  I  am  coming,   another  de- 

8  scendeth  before  me.     (8)  Jesus  said  to  him :  Arise, 

9  take  up  thy  bed,  and  walk.  (9)  And  immediately 
the  man  was  healed;  and  he  arose,  took  up  his 
bed,   and  walked ;    and  it  was  the  sabbath  day. 

10  (10)  And  the  Jews  said  to  him  that  was  healed : 
It  is  the  sabbath ;  it  is  not  lawful  for  thee  to  bear 

11  thy  bed.  (11)  But  he  answered,  and  said  to  them: 
He  that  made  me  whole,  he  said  to  me,  Take  up 

12  thy  bed  and  walk.  (12)  And  they  asked  him : 
Who  is  the  man  that  said  to  thee,  Take  up  thy 

13  bed  and  walk  ?  (13)  But  the  man  that  was  healed, 
knew  not  who  it  was;  for  Jesus  had  slid  away, 
in   the   great  multitude    that   was   in   the   place. 

14  (14)  After  a  time,  Jesus  found  him  in  the  temple, 
and  said  to  him :  Lo,  thou  art  healed ;  sin  not 
again,  lest  something  worse  come  upon  thee  than 

15  before.     (15)  And  the  man  went  and  told  the  Jews, 

16  that  it  was  Jesus  who  had  cured  him.  (16)  And 
for  tliis  cause  the  Jews  persecuted  Jesus,  and  sought 
to  kill  him ;  because  he  had  done  these  things  on 

17  the  sabbath.     (17)  But  Jesus  said  to  them:  My 

18  Father  worketh.  until  now,  and  I  work.  (18)  And 
for  this,  the  Jews  sought  the  more  to  kill  him,  not 
only  because  he  had  broken  the  sabbath,  but  be- 
cause he  had  said  of  God,  that  he  was  his  Father, 

19  and  had  equalled^  himself  with  God.  (19)  And 
Jesus  answered,  and  said  to  them :  Verily,  verily, 
I  say  to  3'ou :  The  Son  can  do  nothing  of  his  own 
pleasure,  but  what  he  seeth  the  Father  do :  for  what 
things  the  Father  doeth,  these  in  like  manner  doeth 

20  the  Son.  (20)  For  the  Father  loveth  his  Son,  and 
showeth  him  every  thing  he  doeth:  and  greater 
works  than  these,  will  he  shoAV  him,  that  ye  may 

21  wonder.  (21)  For  as  the  Father  raiseth  the  dead, 
and  vivifieth  them ;  so  also  the  Son  vivitieth  whom 

22  he  pleaseth.  (22)  For  neither  doth  the  Father 
judge  any  one,  but  hath  given  all  judgment  to  the 

23  Son :  (23)  that  every  man  may  honor  the  Son,  as 
he  honoreth  the  Father.     He  that  honoreth  not  the 


174 


JOHN,   V. 


«  Sy.  CTL^li^] 


sy.  ]i 


Son,  lionorctli  not  the  Father  that  sent  hirn. 
(2-i)  Verily,  verily,  I  say  to  you.  That  he  Avho  hear-  24 
eth  my  word,  and  belicveth  on  him  that  sent  me, 
hath  life  eternal,  and  will  not  come  into  condemna- 
tion, but  hath  passed  from  death  to  life.  (25)  Verilj^,  25 
verily,  I  say  to  you,  That  the  hour  cometn,  and  is 
even  now  come,  when  the  dead  will  hear  the  voice 
of  the  Son  of  God ;  and  they  that  hear,  will  live. 

(26)  For,  as  the  Father  hath  life  in  himself,  so  hath  26 
he  given  *to  the  Son  also,  to  have  life  in  himself: 

(27)  and  hath  moreover  given  him  authority^  to  27 
execute  judgment,''^    But  that  he  is  the  Son  of  man, 

(28)  wonder  not  at  this;    for   the   hour  cometh,  28 
when  all  that  are  in  their  graves  will   hear  his 
voice;  (29)  and  will  come  forth;  they  thht  have  29 
done  good,  to  the  resurrection  of  life,   and  they 
that  have  done  evil,   to  the  resurrection  of  con- 
demnation.    (80)  I  can   do   nothing   of  my  own  30 
pleasure;  but   as   I  hear,  so  I  judge.     And  my 
judgment  is  just;  for  I  seek  not  my  own  pleasure, 
but  the  pleasure  of  him  that  sent  me.     (81)  If  I  31 
should  bear  testimony  respecting  myself,  my  testi- 
mony would  not  be  valid.'"    (32)  There  is  another  32 
that  beareth  testimony  concerning  me ;  and  I  know 
that  the  testimony  which  he  beareth  concerning 
me  is  true.     (33)  Ye  sent  unto  John  ;  and  he  bore  33 
testimony  to  the  truth.     (84)  And  I  have  not  re-  34 
ceived  testimony  from  men:    but  these  things  I 
say,  that  ye  may  live.     (35)  He  was  a  burning  and  35 
shining  lamp ;  and  ye  were  willing  for  a  time,  to 
glory  in  his  light.     (36)  But  I  have  a  testimony,  36 
which  is  greater  than  that  of  John;  for  the  works? 
which  my  Father  hath  given  me  to  accomplish, 
these  Avorks  which  I  do,  testify  of  me  that  the 
Father  hath  sent  me.     (37)  And  the  Father  who  37 
sent  me,  he  testifieth  of  me.     Ye  have  not  at  any 
time  heard  his  voice,  nor  have  ye  seen  his  visage. 
(38)  And  his  word  abideth  not  in  you,  because  ye  38 
believe  not  in  him  whom  he  hath  sent.    (39)  Search  39 
the  scriptures ;  for  in  them,  ye  think,  there  is  life 


*  Tlie  Syrlac  punctuation  here  differs  from  the  Greek,  and  o-reatly  alters  the 
sense.  If  the  Greek  punctuation  were  applied  to  the  Syriac,  this  and  the  follow- 
ing verse  might  be  rendered  thus: — (27)  "and  hat!i  moreover  ghcn  him  authority 
to  execute  judgment,  as  he  is  also  the  Son  of  man.  (28)  iVIarvel  not  at  this;  for 
the  hour  cometh,"  &,o.  This  is  probably  the  true  rendering  of  the  passage;  since 
the  other  scarcely  makes  any  intelligible  sen^e. 


JOHN,  VI. 


175 


40  eternal  for  you ;  and  they  testify  of  me.  (40)  And 
ye  are  unwilling  to  come  to  me,  that  life  eternal 

41  may  be  j^ours.     (41)  I  do  not  receive  glory  from 

42  men.     (42)  But  I  know  you,  that  the  love  of  God 

43  is  not  in  you.  (43)  I  came  in  the  name  of  my 
Father,  and  ye  receive  me  not:  if  another  shall 
come   in   his    own    name,    him   ye   will   receive. 

44  (44)  How  can  ye  believe,  who  receive  glory  from 
one  another,  and  seek  not  the  glory  which  cometh 

45  from  God  only  ?  (45)  Do  ye  suppose,  that  I  shall 
accuse  you  before  the  Father?  There  is  one  that 
will  accuse  you,   that  Moses,  on  whom  ye  rely. 

46  (46)  For,  if  ye  believed  Moses,  ye  would  also 
believe    me;    for    Moses   wrote    concerning    me. 

47  (47)  But  if  ye  believe  not  his  writings,  how  will 
ye  Delieve  my  words  ? 

VI.     After  these  things,  Jesus  went  to  the  other  side 

2  of  the  sea  of  Galilee  [or]  of  Tiberias.=^  (2)  And 
great  multitudes  went  after  him ;  because  they  liad 
seen  the  signs''  which  he  wrought  upon  the  siclc. 

3  (3)  And  Jesus  ascended  a  mountain,  and  there  he 

4  seated  himself  with  his  disciples.      (4)    And  the 

5  feast  of  the  Jewish  passover  was  near. — (5)  And 
Jesus  raised  his  eyes,  and  saw  a  great  multitude 
coming  towards  him ;  and  he  said  to  Philip : 
"Whence  shall  we  buy  bread,  that  these  may  eat  ? 

6  (6)  And  this  he  said,  to  try  him  ;    for  he  knew 

7  what  he  was  about  to  do.  (7)  Philip  said  to  him: 
Two  hundred  denarii  in  bread  would  not  sufl&ce 

8  them,  that  each  might  take  but  a  little.  (8)  One  of 
his  disciples,  Andrew,  the  brother  of  Simon  Cephas, 

9  said  to  him:  (9)  There  is  a  lad  here,  who  hath 
with  him  five  cakes  of  barley,  and  two  fishes;  but 

10  what  are  these  for  all  those  [people]  ?  (10)  Jesus 
said  to  them :  Make  all  the  people  recline.  Now 
there  was  much  grass  in  that  place:  and  the  people 

11  reclined,  in  number  five  thousand.  (11)  And  Jesus 
took  the  bread,  and  blessed,  and  distributed  to  them 
that  reclined.   And  so  also,  with  the  fish ;  as  much 

12  as  they  desired.  (12)  And  when  they  were  satisfied, 
he  said  to  his  disciples :  Gather  up  the  fragments 

13  which  remain,  so  that  nothing  be  lost.  (13)  And 
they  collected  and  filled  twelve  baskets,  with  frag- 
'ments  of  what  remained  to  them  that  had  eaten  of 

14  the  five  barley  cakes.— (14)    And  those  people, 


^  Sy.  ]Lol] 


176 


Sy.  luLlD 


JOHN,    VI. 

when  tliey  saw  tlie  sign  wliich  Jesus  had  wrought, 
said:  Certainly,  this  is  that  j^rophet  who  was  to 
come  into  the  world.  (15)  And  Jesus  knew,  that  15 
they  Avere  about  to  come  and  take  him  by  force, 
and  make  him  king :  and  he  retired  into  a  moun- 
tain alone. 

And  when  it  was  evening,  his  disciples  went  16 
down  to  the  sea,  (17)  and  sat  in  a  ship,  and  were  17 
going  over  to  Capernaum.    And  darkness  came  on, 
and  Jesus  had  not  come  to  them.     (18)  And  the  18 
sea  was  boisterous  against  them,  for  a  violent  wind 
was  blowing.     (19)  And  they  had  gone  about  five  19 
and  twenty  or  thirty  furlongs,  when  they  saw  Jesus 
walking  upon  the  sea :  and  as  he  drew  near  to  the 
ship,  they  were  afraid.      (20)   But  Jesus  said  to  20 
them :  It  is  I ;  be  not  afraid.     (21)  And  they  were  21 
glad  to  receive  him  into  the  ship.     And,  directly, 
the  ship  was  at  the  laud  to  which  they  were  going. 
— (22)  And  the  next  day,  the  multitude,  who  had  22 
remained  on  the  other  side  of  the  sea,  saw  that 
there  was  no  other  ship  there,  except  that  in  which 
the  disciples  embarked,  and   that  Jesus  did  not 
embark  in  that  ship  with  his  disciples;  (23)  yet  23 
that  other  shi|)s  had  come  from  Tiberias,  near  to 
the  place  where  they  ate  the  bread  when  Jesus 
blessed  [it].     (21)  And  when  the  multitude  saw,  24 
that  Jesus  was  not  there,  nor  his  disciples;  they 
embarked  in  ships,  and  came  to  Capernaum,  and 
sought  for  Jesus. — (25)  And  when  they  found  him  25 
on  the  other  side  of  the  sea,  they  said  to  him :  Our 
Rabbi,    when   camest   thou   hither?      (26)    Jesus  26 
replied  and  said  to  them :  Verily,  verily,  I  say  to 
you,  Ye  seek  me,  not  because  ye  saw  the  signs, 
but  because  ye  ate  the  bread  and  were  satisfied. 
(27)  Labor  not  for  the  food  that  perisheth,  but  for  27 
the  food  that  abideth  unto  life  eternal,  which  the 
Son  of  man  will  give  to  you ;  for  him  hath  God 
the  Father  sealed.     (28)  They  said  to  him :  What  28 
shall  we  do,  in  order  to  work  the  works  of  God  ? 
(29)  Jesus  replied  and  said  to  them :  This  is  the  29 
work  of  God,  that  ye  believe  on  him  whom  he  hath 
sent— (30)    They  say  to  him:    What  sign  doest  30 
thou,  that  we  may  see  and  believe  in  thee  ?    What 
workestthou?     (31)  Our  fathers  ate  the  manna,^  31 
in  the  wilderness ;  as  it  is  written,  Ho  gave  them 
bread  from  heaven  to  cat.  .  (32)  Jesus  said  to  them:  32 


JOHN,    VI. 


177 


Yerily,  verily,  I  say  to  you,  Moses  gave  you  not 
the  bread  from  heaven ;  but  my  Father  giveth  you 

33  the  real  bread  from  heaven.  (33)  For  the  bread 
of  God  is,  he  that  came  down  fi^om  heaven,  and 

34  giveth  life  to  the  world.     (34)  They  say  to  him : 

35  Our  Lord,  give  us  at  all  times  this  bread.  (35)  Jesus 
said  to  them:  I  am  the  bread  of  life:  he  that 
Cometh   to   me,  shall   not  hunger;    and   he   that 

36  believeth  on  me,  shall  not  thirst,  for  ever.  (36)  But 
I  said  to  you.  That  ye  have  seen  me,  and  do  not 

37  believe.  (37)  All  that  my  Father  gave  me,  will 
come  to  me :  and  him,  that  cometh  to  me,  I  will 

38  not  cast  out.  (38)  For  I  came  down  from  heaven, 
not  to  do  my  own  pleasure,  but  the  pleasure  of 

39  him  that  sent  me.  (39)  And  this  is  the  pleasure 
of  him  that  sent  me,  that  whatever  he  hath  given 
me,  I  should  lose  nothing  of  it,  but  should  raise  it 

40  up  at  the  last  day.  (40)  For  this  is  the  pleasure  of 
my  Father,  that  every  one  who  seeth  the  Son,  and 
believeth  on  him,  should  have  life  eternal ;  and  I 

41  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day. — (41)  Then  the 
Jews  murmured  at  him,  because  he  said :  I  am  the 

42  bread,  who  have  descended  from  heaven.  (42)  And 
they  said :  Is  not  this  Jesus  the  son  of  Joseph, 
Avhose  father  and  mother  we  know  ?     And  how 

43  doth  he  say :  I  came  down  from  heaven  ?  (43)  Jesus 
replied  and  said  to  them :  Murmur  not,  one  with 

44  another.  (44)  No  man  can^i  come  to  me,  unless 
the  Father  Avho  sent  me,  shall  draw^  him ;  and  I 

45  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day.  (45)  For  it  is 
written,  in  the  prophet:  And  they  shall  all  be 
taught  of  God.  Whoever,  therefore,  heareth  from 
the  Father,  and  learneth  from  him,  cometh  to  me. 

46  (46)  Not  that  any  one  hath  seen  the  Father,  except 
him  who  hath  come  from  God ;  he  it  is,  hath  seen 

47  the  Father. — (47)  Verily,  verily,  I  say  to  you : 
That,  to  him  who  believeth  in  me,  there  is  life 

48  eternal.     (48)  I  am  the  bread  of  life.f    (49)  Your 

49  fathers  ate  the  manna,  in  the  wilderness,  and  they 

50  died.  (50)  But  this  is  the  bread  which  cometh 
from  heaven,  that  a  man  may  eat  of  it,  and  not  die. 

51  (51)  I  am  the  bread  of  life,  who  have  come  down 
from  heaven :  and  if  a  man  shall  eat  of  this  bread, 
he  will  live  for  ever.  And  the  bread  which  I  shall 
give,  is  my  body,?  which  I  give  for  the  life  of  the 

52  world. — (52)  Then  the  Jews  contended  one  with 


Sy.  C7lr.^J 


_Sy. 


Sy. 


.^ 


178 


JOHN,    VII. 


Sy.  ^\^ 


■  Sy.  ivord. 


Sy.'U4£D 


59 
60 


another,  and  said :  How  can  he  give  us  his  body 
to  eat  ?     (53)   And  Jesus  said  to  them :    Verily,  53 
verily,  I  say  to  you,  That,  unless  ye  eat  the  body  of 
the  Son  of  man,  and  drink  his  blood,  ye  have  no 
life  within  you.     (5 J:)  But  he  that  eateth  of  my  5-i 
body,   and  drinketh  of  my  blood,  to  him  is  life 
eternal ;  and  I  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day. 
(55)  For  my  body  truly  is  food,  and  my  blood  55 
truly  is  drink.     {66)  He  that  eateth  my  body,  and  56 
drinketh  my  blood,  abideth  in  me,  and  I  in  him. 
(57)  As  the  living  Father  hath  sent  me,  and  I  live  57 
because'^  of  the  Father ;  so  he  that  shall  eat  me,  he 
also  will  live  because  of  me.    (58)  This  is-the  bread  58 
that  came  down  from  heaven  :  not  as  your  fathers 
ate  the  manna,  and  died ;  whoever  shall  eat  of  this 
bread,  will   live  for  ever. — (59)    These  things  he 
uttered  in  the  synagogue,  while  teaching  at  Caper- 
naum.    (60)  And  many  of  his  disciples  who  heard 
[him],  said :  This  is  a  hard  speech,  Avho  can  hear 
it. — (61)  And  Jesus  knew  in  himself,  that  his  dis-  61 
ciples  murmured  at  this;    and  he  said  to  them. 
Doth  this  stumble  you  ?     (62)  If  then,  ye  were  to  62 
see  the  Son  of  man  ascend,  to  where  he  was  from 
the  beginning  ! — (63)  It  is  the  Spirit  that  vivifieth ;  63 
the  body  profiteth  nothing.     The  words  which  I 
have  used  with  you,  they  are  spirit,  and  they  arc 
life.     (61)  But  there  are  some  of  3-ou,  that  believe  61 
not.     For  Jesus  knew,  from  the  beginning,  Avho 
they  were  that  believed  not,  and  who  it  was  that 
would  betray  him.     (65)   And  he  said  to  them:  60 
For  this  reason,  I  said  to  you.  That  no  one  can' 
come  to  me,  unless  it  be  given  to  him  by  my 
Father. — (66)  On  account  of  this  spcech,k  many  of  66 
his  disciples  turned  back,  and  walked  not  with  him. 
(67)  And  Jesus  said  to  the  twelve :  Arc  ye  also  67 
disposed  to  go  away  ?     (68)  Simon  Cephas  replied,  68 
and  said :  My  Lord,  to  whom  shall  we  go  ?     The 
words  of  life  eternal  are  with  thee.     (69)  And  we  69 
believe,  and  know,  that  thou  art  the  Messiah,  the 
Son  of  the  living  God.     (70)  Jesiis  said  to  them :  70 
Have  not  I  chosen  you  twelve?     Yet  one  of  you 
is  a  devil.i     (71)  This  he  spoke  of  Judas  Iscariot,  71 
the  son  of  Simon  ;  for  he  was  afterwards  to  betray 
hhn,  beino;  one  of  the  twelve. 

After  these  things  Jesus  walked  in  Galilee ;  for  YII. 


JOHN,    Vli. 


179 


he  would  not  walk  in  Judoca,  because  the  Jews 

2  sought  to  slay  him. — (2)  And  the  Jewish  feast  of 

3  tabernacles  drew  near.  (3)  And  the  brothers'^  of 
Jesus  said  to  him :  Leave  here,  and  go  into  Jud£ea ; 
that  thy  disciples  may  see  the  works  thou  doest. 

4  (4)  For  there  is  no  one  who  doeth  any  thing  in 
secret,  while  he  wisheth  to  become  public.  If 
thou  doest  these  things,  show  thyself  to  the  world. 

5  (5)  For  even  his  brothers  did  not  believe  in  Jesus. 

6  (6)  Jesus  said  to  them :  My  time  hath  not  yet  come : 

7  but  your  time  is  always  ready.  (7)  The  world 
cannot  hate  you,  but  me  it  hateth ;  because  I  testify 

8  of  it,  that  its  deeds  are  evil.  (8)  Go  ye  up  to  the 
feast ;  I  do  not  go  up  to  this  feast  now,  because  my 

9  time  is  not  yet  completed.     (9)  These  things  he 

10  said,  and  remained  still  in  Galilee.  (10)  But  when 
his  brothers  had  gone  up  to  the  feast,  then  he  also 
went  up,  not  openly,  but  as  it  were  secretly. — 

11  (11)  And  the  Jews  sought  for  him  at  the  feast; 

12  and  they  said,  Where  is  he  ?  (12)  And  there  was 
much  altercation  among  the  people  respecting  him ; 
for  some  said,  lie  is  a  good  man  ;  while  others  said, 

13  No ;  but  he  deceiveth  the  people.  (13)  Yet  no 
one  spoke  openly  of  him,  from  fear  of  the  Jews. 

11       And  in  the  midst^  of  the  days  of  the  feast,  Jesus 

15  went  into  the  temple,  and  taught.  (15)  And  the 
Jews  wondered,  and  said :  How  knoweth  this  man 

16  literature,  having  not  been  educated?  (16)  Jesus 
answered  and  said :  My  doctrine  is  not  from  me, 

17  but  from  him  that  sent  me.  (17)  He  that  wisheth 
to  do  his  pleasure,  will  understand  my  doctrine, 
whether  it  is  from  God,  or  whether  I  speak  from 

18  my  own  pleasure.  (18)  He  that  speaketh  accord- 
ing to  the  pleasure  of  his  own  mind,  seeketh  glory 
for  himself:  but  he  who  seeketh  the  glory  of  him 
that  sent  him,  is  veracious,  and  evil  is  not  in  his 

19  heart.     (19)  Did  not  Moses   give   you  the   law? 

20  Yet  no  one  of  you  observcth  the  law.  (20)  Why 
do  ye  seek  to  kill  me  ?  The  multitude  answered 
and  said:    Thou  hast  a  demon:    who  seeketh  to 

21  kill  thee?  (21)  Jesus  replied,  and  said  to  them: 
I  have  wrought  one  work,  and  ye   all  wonder. 

22  (22)  Because  Moses  gave  you  circumcision,  (not 
that  it  was  from  Moses,  but  it  was  from  the  fathers,) 

23  ye  circumcise  a  child  on  the  sabbath.  (23)  And  if 
a  child  is  circumcised  on  the  sabbath  day,  that  the 


Sy.  ^lOlQ-Kj") 


^  Sy.  iflien  the 
daijs  of  the 
feast  were 
dicided. 


180 


JOHN,    VII. 


Sy. 


i  in  1  n  O 


«>  Sy.  "j  2.32.1 


or,  IS. 


law  of  Moses  may  not  be  violated,  do  ye  mumiur 
at  nie,  because  I  have  made  a  man  entirely  sound 
on  the  sabbath  day  ?     (24)  Judge  not,  with  a  re-  24 
spect  for  persons ;  but  judge  3^e  a  righteous  judg- 
ment.— (25)  And  some  from  Jerusalem  said:    Is  25 
not  this  he,  whom  th6y  seek  to  kill?     (26)  And  26 
lo,  he  discourseth  publicly,  and  they  say  nothing 
to  him.     Do  our  Elders'"-  know,  that  he  really  is 
the  Messiah  ?     (27)  Yet  we  know  this  man,  whence  27 
he  is;  the  Messiah,  when  he  shall  come,  no  one 
knoweth  whence  he   is.     (28)  And  Jesus,  v.diile  28 
teaching  in  the  temple,  raised  his  voice  and  said : 
Ye  both  know  me,  and  ye  know  from  whence  I 
am.     And  I  did  not  come  of  my  own  accord  ;  but 
he   that   sent  me   is   true.     Him   ye   know   not; 
(29)  but  I  know  him ;  because  I  am  from  him,  and  29 
he  sent  me. — (80)  And  they  sought  to  apprehend  80 
him ;  but  no  one  laid  hands  on  him,  because  his 
hour  was  not  yet  come.     (31)  And  many  of  the  81 
multitude  believed  on  him,  and  said:  When  the 
Messiah  cometh,  will  he  work  greater  signs'^  than 
these  which  this  man  doeth  ?     (32)  And  the  Phari-  82 
sees  heard  the  multitude  say  these  things  of  him : 
and  they  and  the  chief  priests  sent  constables  to 
take  him.     (33)  And  Jesus  said:  A  little  while  83 
longer  I  am  with  you,  and  then  I  go  to  him  that 
sent  me.     (3-1)  And  ye  will  seek  me,  and  will  not  34 
find  me;    and   where   I   am,    ye    cannot    come, 
(85)  The  Jews  said  among  themselves:  AVhither  85 
is  he  about  to  go,  that  we  cannot  find  him?     AVill 
he  go  to  some  region  of  the  Gentiles,  and  teach  the 
profane?     (36)  What  means^  this  speech  he   ut-  36 
tered:    Ye  will  seek  me,  and  will  not  find  me; 
and  where  I  am,  ye  cannot  come  ? 

And  on  the  great  day,  which  was  the  last  of  the  37 
feast,  Jesus  stood  and  cried,  and  said :  If  any  man 
thirst,  let  him  come  to  me  and  drink.     (38)  Who-  38 
ever  believeth  in  me,  as  the  scriptures  have  said, 
Out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  vv\aters. 
(39)  (This  he  said  of  the  Spirit,  which  they  who  39 
believe  in   him  were  to  receive:   for  the  Spirit 
had  not  yet  been  given,  because  Jesus  was  not 
yet  glorified.)     (40)  And  many  of  the  multitude  40 
who  heard  his  discourses,  said:   Certainly,   he  is 
a  prophet.     (41)  Others  said:  He  is  the  Messiah.  41 
Others  said :    Doth  Messiah  come  from  Galilee  ? 


JOHN,    VIII. 

42  (42)  Dotli  not  the  scriptures  say,  That  Messiah 
Cometh  of  the  seed  of  David,  and  from  Bethlehem 

43  the  town  of  David  ?     (48)  And  there  was  a  division 

44  among  the  multitude  respecting  him.  (44)  And 
there  were  some  of  them  who  wished  to  apprehend 

45  him.  But  no  one  laid  hands  on  him. — (45)  And  the 
constables  came  to  the  chief  priests  and  Pharisees ; 
and  the  priests  said  to  them :  Why  have  ye  not 

46  brought  him  ?  (46)  The  constables  say  to  them : 
Never  did  a  man  speak,   as  this  man  speaketh. 

47  (47)  The  Pharisees  said  to  them :  Are  ye  also  de- 

48  ceived?     (48)  Have  any  of  the  chiefs,^  or  of  the 

49  Pharisees,   believed  in  him?     (49)  Bat  this  peo- 

60  pie,  who  know  not  the  law,  are  accursed.  (50)  One 
of  them:   Nicodemus,  he  who  came  to  Jesus  by 

61  night,  said  to  them:  (51)  Doth  our  law  condemn  a 
man,  unless  it  first  hear  him,   and  know  what  he 

62  hath  done?  (52)  The}^  answered,  and  said  to  him : 
Art  thou  also  from  Galilee  ?     Search,  and  see,  that 

63  no  prophet  ariseth  from  Galilee.  (53)  So  they 
went  every  one  to  his  own  house.* 

VIII.     And   Jesus   went    to    the   mount   of  Olives. 

2  (2)  And  in  the  morning  he  came  again  to  the  tem- 
ple; and  all  the  people  came  to  him,  and  he  sat 

3  down  and  taught  them.  (3)  And  the  Scribes  and 
Pharisees  brought  forward  a  woman  that  was 
caught  in  adultery.     And  when  they  had  placed 

4  her  in  the  midst,  (4)  they  say  to  him:  Teacher, 
this  woman  was  caught  openly  in  the  act  of  adul- 

5  tery.  (5)  And  in  the  law  of  Moses,  [God]  hath 
commanded  us  to  stone  such  persons.    What  there- 

6  fore  dost  thou  say?  (6)  And  this  they  said,  tempt- 
ing him,  so  that  they  might  have  [ground]  to  accuse 
him.     But  Jesus  having  stooped  down,  was  writing 

7  on  the  ground.  (7)  And  as  thej^  continued  asking 
him,  he  straightened  himself  up,  and  said  to  them: 
Whoever  among  you  is  without  sin,  let  him  first 

8  cast  a  stone  at  her.     (8)  And,  having  again  stooped 

9  down,  he  wrote  on  the  ground.  (9)  And  they, 
when  they  heard  [it],  went  out  one  by  one,  begin- 
ning with  the  okler;*    and  the  woman  was   left 

10  alone,  where  she  had  stood  in  the  midst,     (10)  And 


181 


Sy.  "U-.": 


S}^  *)  ti  >  «  n 


*  This  53d  verso  is  wanting  in  many  early  editions  of  the  Syriac  N.  Testament. 
So  also  the  whole  story  of  the  adulteress,  in  the  following  chapter,  v.  1-11. 


182 


JOHN,    VIII. 


''  Sy.  corporeal- 
ly. 


when  Jesus  had  straightened  himself  up,  he  said 
to  the  woman:  Where  are  they?     Doth  no  one 
condemn   thee?     (11)   And   she   said:    No   man,  11 
Lord,     And  Jesus  said:    Neither  do  I  condemn 
thee.     Go  thou,  and  henceforth  sin  no  more. 

And  Jesus  asiain  conversed  with  them,  and  said :  12 
I  am  the  hght  of  the  world :  he  that  cometh  to 
mc,  will  not  walk  in  darkness;  but  will  hud  for 
himself  the  light  of  life.     (13)  The  Pharisees  said  13 
to  him :  Tliou  bearest  witness  of  thyself,  thy  testi- 
mony is  not  certain.     (14)  Jesus  answered  and  said  1-1 
to  them :  Although  I  bear  witness  of  myself,  my 
testimony  is   certain,  because   I   know  whence  I 
came,  and  whither  I  go.     But  ye  do  not  know, 
whence  I  came,  and  whither  I  go.     (15)  Ye  judge  15 
according  to  the  flesh  :b  Ijudgenoone.     (16)  Yet  16 
if  I  judge,  my  judgment  is  certain,  because  I  am 
not   alone,    but  I  and  my  Father  who   sent  me. 
(17)  And  in  your  law  it  is  written,  that  the  testi-  17 
mony  of  two  persons  is  certain.     (18)  I  am  one  18 
who  bear  witness  of  myself,  and  my  Father  who 
sent  me,  beareth  witness  of  me.     (19)  They  say  to  19 
him:   Where  is  thy  Father?     Jesus  replied,  and 
said  to  them :  Ye  neither  know  me  nor  my  Father. 
If  ye  had  known  me,  ye  would  also  have  known 
my  Father. — (20)  These  words  spake  Jesus  in  the  20 
treasury,  as  he  taught  in  the  temple :  and  no  one 
laid  hands  on  him,  because  his  hour  was  not  yet 
come. 

Again  Jesus  said  to  them:  I  go  away,  and  ye  21 
will  seek  me,  and  will   die   in  your  sins.     And 
whither  I  go,  ye  cannot  come.     (22)  The  Jews  said :  22 
Is  he  about  to  kill  himself,  that  he  should  say, 
Whither  I  go  ye  cannot  come?     (23)  And  he  said  23 
to  them:  Ye  are  from  below,  I  am  from  above; 
ye   are   of  this  world,    I   am   not  of  this  world. 
(2-1)  I  said  to  you.  That  ye  will  die  in  your  si  us;  2-1 
for  if  ye  believe  not  that  I  am  he,  ye  will  die  in 
your  sins.     (25)  The  Jews  said  to  him :  Who  art  25 
thou?   Jesus  said  to  them:  Although  I  have  begun 
to  converse  with  you,  (26)  I  have  yet  many  things  26 
to  say  and  to  judge  concerning  you.     But  he  that 
sent  me  is  true :  and  the  thiugs  which  I  have  heard 
from  him,  them  I  speak  in  the  world.     (27)  And  27 
they  did  not  know,  that  he  s])ake  to  them  of  the 
Father.     (28)  Jesus  said  to  them  again :  When  ye  28 


JOHN,    VIII. 


183 


32 
33 


35 

36 

37 

38 


sball  have  lifted  up  the  Son  of  man,  then  will  ye 
know  that  I  am  he,  and  that  I  do  nothing  from  my 
own  pleasure,  but  as  my  Father  taught  me,  so  I 

29  speak.  (29)  And  he  that  sent  me,  is  with  me; 
and  my  Father  hath  not  left  me  alone,  because  I 

30  do,  at  all  times,  that  which  pleaseth  him. — (30)  And 
when  he  had  spoken  these  things,  many  believed 

31  on  him.  (31)  And  Jesus  said  to  those  Jews  who 
believed  on  him:  If  ye  continue  in  my  word,  ye 
Avill  be  truly  my  disciples.  (32)  And  ye  will 
know  the  truth;  and  the  truth  will  make  you 
free.  (33)  They  say  to  him  :  We  are  the  seecl  of 
Abraham,  and  never  were  in  servitude  to  any 
man ;  and  how  sayest  thou.  Ye  will  be  freemen  ? 

31:  (31:)  Jesus  said  to  them:  Verily,  verily,  I  say  to 
■you,  That  whoever  committeth  sin,  is  the  servant 
of  sin.  (35)  And  a  servant  abideth  not  for  ever^ 
in  the  house ;  but  the  Son  abideth  for  ever.  (36)  If 
therefore  the  Son  shall  make  you  free,  ye  will 
really  be  free  men.  (37)  I  know  that  ye  are  the 
children  of  Abraham ;  but  ye  seek  to  kill  me,  be- 
cause ye  do  not  acquiesce  in  my  word.  (38)  I 
speak  that  which  I  have  seen  with  my  Father,  and 
ye  do  that  which  ye  have  seen  with  your  father. 

39  (39)  They  answered,  and  said  to  him :  Our  father 
is  Abraham.  Jesus  said  to  them :  If  ye  were 
children  of  Abraham,  ye  would  do  the  works  of 

•10  Abraham.  (-10)  But  now  ye  seek  to  kill  me,  a 
man  who  hath  told  you  the  truth,  which  I  have 

41  heard  from  God  :  this  did  not  Abraham.  (41)  But 
ye  do  the  works  of  your  father.  They  say  to  him : 
We  are  not  [the  offspring]  of  whoredom ;  we  have 

42  one  Father,  God.  (42)  Jesus  said  to  them  :  If  God 
were  your  Father,  ye  would  love  me ;  for  I  pro- 
ceeded and  came  from  God :  I  did  not  come  of  my 

43  own  accord,  but  he  sent  me.  (43)  Why  do  ye  not 
understand  ni}^  speech?     It  is  because  ye  cannot 

44  hear  my  speech.  (44)  Ye  are  of  your  lather,  the 
calumniator  ]^  and  the  lust  of  your  father  jo  are 
disposed  to  do.  He  was  from  the  beginning  a 
manslayer,  and  abode  not  in  the  truth ;  for  the  truth 
is  not  in  hira,  and  when  he  speaketh  a  lie  he  speak- 
eth  from  himself,   for  he  is  a  liar,  and  the  fiither 

45  of  it.     (45)  But  me,  because  I  speak  the  truth,  ye 

46  believe  me  not.  (46)  Which  of  you  convicteth  me 
of  sin  ?     And  if  I  speak  the  truth,  why  do  ye  not 


Sv  Sn\v\ 


Sy. 


]^^:^1 


184 


JOHN,    IX. 


«  Sy.  »iZU] 


Sy. 


believe  me  ?     (47)  He  that  is  of  God,  hearetli  the  47 
words  of  God.     Therefore  je  do  not  hear,  because 
ye  are  not  of  God.     (48)  The  Jews  answered,  and  48 
said  to  him :  Did  we  not  well  say,  that  thou  art  a 
Samaritan,  and  hast  a  demon?     (49)  Jesus  said  to  49 
them :  I  have  no  demon :  but  I  honor  God ;  and 
ye  contemn  me.      (50)   But  I  seek  not   my  own  50 
glory  :  there  is  one  that  seeketh  [it],  and  judgeth. 
(51)  Verily,  verily,  I  say  to  you :  He  that  keepeth  51 
my  word,  will  never  see  death.      (52)    The  Jews  52 
say  to  him :  Now  we  know,  that  thou  hast  a  demon. 
Abraham   is   dead,  and   the   prophets ;    yet  thou 
saycst :  He  that  keepeth  my  word,  will  never  taste 
death.      (53)    Art   thou  greater   than   our  father  53 
Abraham  who  is  dead,  or  than  the  prophets  who 
died?     What  dost  thou  make  thyself?    (54)  Jesus  54 
said  to  them :  If  I  glorify  mysell',  my  glory  is  noth- 
ing.    It  is  my  Father  that  glorilieth  me,  of  whom 
ye  say,  He  is  our  God.     (55)  And  ye  know  him  55 
not.    But  I  know  him  ;  and  if  I  should  say,  I  know 
him  not,  L  should  be  a  liar,  like  you :  but  I  do 
know  him,  and  I  observe  his  word.    {5Q)  Abraham  56 
your  father  desired  to  sec  mj^  day  :  and  he  saw  it, 
and  rejoiced.     (57)  The  Jews  say  to  him:   Thou  57 
art  not  yet  fifty   years  old,   and  hast  thou  seen 
Abraham  ?   (58)  Jesus  said  to  them :  Verily,  verily,  58 
I  sa}^  to  you.  That  before  Abraham  existed, ^  I  was. 
(59)  And  they  took  up  stones  to  stone  him.     But  59 
Jesus    concealed    himself,    and   went  out   of  the 
temple,  and  passed  along  among  them,  and  went 
away. 

And  while  passing,  he  saw  a  man  blind  from  his  IX. 
mother's  womb.     (2)  And  his  disciples  asked  him,     2 
and  said :  Our  Rabbi,  who  sinned,  this  man  or  his 
parents,  that  he  was  born  blind  ?     (3)  Jesus  said  to     3 
them :  Neither  did  he  sin,  nor  his  parents ;    but 
that  the  works  of  God  might  be  seen  in  him.    (4)  I     4 
must  work  the  works  of  him  that  sent  mc,  while  it 
is  day ;  the  night  cometh,  in  which  no  one  can 
work.     (5)  So  long  as  I  am  in  the  world,  I  am  the     5 
light  of  the  world.     (6)  And  having  spoken  thus,     G 
he  spit  on  the  ground,  and  made  mud  with  the 
spittle,  and  spread  it  on  the  eyes  of  the  blind  man ; 
(7)  and  said  to  him :  Go,  wash  in  the  baptistery^'  of     7 
Siloam.      And  he  went,  and  washed,   and  came 


JOHN,    IX. 


185 


8  away  seeing.     (8)  And  Lis  neighbors,  and  they  by 
whom  he  had  before  been  seen  begging,  said  :    Is 

9  not  this  he,  who  sat  and  begged  ?  (9)  Some  said,  It 
is  he:  and  others  said,  No  ;  bat  he  is  very  like  him. 

10  But  he  said :  I  am  he.     (10)  And  they  said  to  him: 

11  How  were  thy  eyes  opened?  (11)  He  answered, 
and  said  to  them :  A  man  whose  name  is  Jesus, 
made  mud  and  spread  it  on  my  ej'es,  and  said  to 
me,  Go,  wash  in  the  waters  of  Siloam.  And  I 
went,   and   washed,  and   my   sight  was    restored. 

12  (12)  Thej^  said  to  him:  Wliere  is  he?  He  said  to 
them  :  I  know  not. 

13  And    they  brought   him  that  had  been  bhnd, 

14  before  the  Pharisees.  (14)  Now  it  was  on  the  sab- 
bath that  Jesus  made  the  mud,  and  opened  his 

15  eyes.  (15)  And  again  the  Pharisees  aslced  him : 
How  was  thy  siglit  restored?  And  he  said  to 
them :  He  put  mud  upon  my  eyes,  and  I  washed, 

16  and  my  sight  was  restored.  (16)  And  some  of  the 
Pharisees  said  :  This  man  is  not  of  God,  for  he  doth 
not  observe  the  sabbath.  Bat  others  said  :  How 
can  a  man  that  is  a  sinner,  work  these  signs  ?    And 

17  there  was  a  division  among  them.  (17)  They  say 
again  to  the  blind  man  :  What  sayest  thou  of  him, 
seeing  he  hath  opened  thy  eyes?    He  said  to  them : 

18  I  say,  that  he  is  a  prophet.  (18)  And  the  Jews 
would  not  believe  concerning  him,  that  he  had 
been  blind,  and  recovered  sight,  until  they  called 

19  the  parents  of  him  who  recovered  sight.  (19)  And 
they  asked  them :  Is  tliis  your  son,  of  whom  ye  say 
that  he  was  born  blind  ?     And  how  doth  he  now 

20  see?  (20)  And  his  parents  answered  and  said: 
We  know  that  this  is  our  son,  and  that  he  was  born 

21  blind;  (21)  but  how  he  now  seeth,  or  who  opened 
his  eyes,  we  know  not.    He  hath  come  to  his  years, 

22  ask  him ;  he  will  speak  for  himself  (22)  These 
things  said  his  parents,  because  they  feared  the 
J  ews :  for  the  Jews  had  decided,  that  if  any  one 
should   confess   him   to  be    Messiah,   they   would 

23  expel  him  from  the  synagogue.  (23)  For  this 
reason  his  parents  said.  He  hath  come  to  his  3'ears, 

24  ask  him. — (24)  And  they  called  a  second  time  the 
man  who  had  been  blind,  and  said  to  him:  Give 
glory  to  God ;    for  we  know  that  this  man   is  a 

25  sinner.  (25)  He  replied,  and  said  to  them  :  Whether 
he  is  a  sinner,  I  know  not;  but,  one  thing  I  know, 


186 


JOHN,   X. 


•>  Sy.  not  from 
of  old. 


that  I  was  blind,  aiid  lo,  now  I  see.     (26)  They  26 
said  to  him  again :  What  did  lie  to  thee  ?    How  did 
he  open  thy  eyes  ?     (27)  He  §aid  to  them  :  I  have  27 
told  you,   and  ye  did  not  hear.     Why  would  3'e 
hear  again  ?     Do  3^e  also  wish  to  become  his  disci- 
ples?    (28)  But  tliey  reproached  him,  and  said  to  28 
him :  Thou  art  his  disciple,  but  we  arc  the  disci- 
ples of  ]\Ioses.     (29)  And  we  know  that  God  con-  29 
versed  with  Moses  ;  but  as  for  this  man,  we  know 
not  whence  he  is.     (30)  The  man  replied  and  said  30 
to  them:    In  this  therefore  is  [something]  to  be 
admired,  that  ye  know  not  Avhence  he  is,  and  yet 
he  hath  opened  my  eyes.    (31)  Now  Ave  knoAv,  that  31 
God  heareth  not  the  voice  of  sinners  ;  but  him  that 
feareth  him,  and  doeth  his  pleasure,  him  he  hear- 
eth.    (32)  Never''  hath  it  been  heard,  that  any  one  32 
opened  the  eyes  of  one  born  blind.     (33)  If  this  33 
man  were  not  of  God,  he  could  not  do  this  thing. 
(34)  They  replied,   and  said  to  him:   Thou  wast  34 
wholly  born  in  sins ;  and  dost  thou  teach  us?    x\nd 
they  expelled  him. 

And  Jesus  heard  that  thej*  had  expelled  him  ;  35 
and  he  found  him,  and  said  to  him  :  Believest  thou 
on  the  Son  of  God  ?     (36)  And  he  that  was  healed,  36 
answered  and  said :    My  Lord,  Avho  is  he,  that  I 
may  believe  on  him?      (37)  Jesus  said  to  him:  37 
Thou  hast  seen  him,  and  it  is  he  that  talketh  with 
thee.     (38)  And  he  said :  My  Lord,  I  believe :  and  38 
he   fell    down,  and   worshipped   him. — (39)   And  39 
Jesus  said  :  For  the  judgment  of  this  world,  have 
I  come ;   that  they  who  see  not,  might  see ;  and 
that  they  who  see,  might  become  blind.    (40)  And  40 
[some]  of  those  Pharisees  who  were  with  him,  heard 
these  things;  and  they  said  to  him:  How?    Are 
we  also  bUnd  ?      (41)  Jesus  said  to  them :    If  ye  41 
were  blind,  ye  would  be  Avithout  sin ;  but  now  ye 
say,  We  see ;  therefore  your  sin  is  establislicd. 

Verily,  vcril}^,  I  say  to  you.  That  he  avIio  doth  not  X. 
enter  by  the  door  into  the  fold  of  the  flock,  but 
climbeth  up  in  some  other  place,  he  is  a  thief  and  a 
robber.    (2)  But  he  that  entereth  by  the  door,  is  the     2 
shepherd  of  the  flock.     (3)  And  to  him  the  door-     3 
keeper  openeth  the  door;  and  the  sheep  hear  his 
voice.    And  he  calleth  the  sheep  b}-  their  names,  and 
leadeth  them  out.    (4)  And  when  he  hath  led  out  his     4 


JOHN,    X. 

flock,  lie  goetli  before  it ;  and  his  slieep  follow  liim, 
because  they  know  his  voice.  (5)  But  after  a 
stranger  the  flock  will  not  follow,  but  it  fleeth  from 
him ;  because  it  knoweth  not  the  voice  of  a  stran- 
ger.    (6)  This  allegory^  spake  Jesus  to  them  ;**  but 


187 


12 


7  they  knew  not  what  he  said  to  them. — (7)   And 
Jesus  said  to  them  again :  Verily,  verily,  I  say  to 

8  you.  That  I  am  the  door  of  the  flock.    (8)  All  those 
who   have  come,  were  thieves  and  robbers:    but 

9  the  flock  did  not  hear  them.     (9)  I  am  the  door : 
and  if  any  enter  by  me,  he  will  live,  and  will  come 

10  in  and  go  out,  and  will  find  pasture.  (10)  The 
thief  Cometh  not,  but  that  he  may  steal,  and  kill, 
and  destroy.     I  have  come,  that  they  may  have 

11  life,  and  may  have  that  which  is  excellent.  (11)  I 
am  a  good  shepherd.  A  good  shepherd  exposeth 
his  life  for  the  sheep.  (12)  But  a  hireling,  who  is 
not  the  shepherd,  and  to  whom  the  sheep  do  not 
belong,  when  he  seeth  the  wolf  coming,  leaveth  the 
flock,  and  fleeth ;  and  the  wolf  cometh,  and  teareth, 
and  disperseth  the  flock.  (13)  And  a  hireling 
fleeth,  because  he  is  a  hireling,  and  hath  no  concern 
for  the  flock.  (14)  I  am  a  good  shepherd  ;  and  I 
know  my  own  [sheep],  and  am  known  by  my  own. 
(15)  As  my  Father  knoweth  me,  so  know  I  my 
Father ;  .and  I  expose  my  life  for  the  flock.  (16)  And 
I  have  other  sheep,  which  are  not  of  this  fold :  and 
them  also  I  must  bring ;  and  they  will  hear  my 
voice ;  and  the  whole  will  be  one  flock,  and  one 
shepherd.  (17)  For  this  cause  my  Father  loveth 
me,  that  I  lay  down  my  life,  to  resume  it  again. 

18  (18)  There  is  no  one  that  taketh  it  from  me ;  but  I 
lay  it  down  of  my  own  pleasure:  for  I  have 
authority  to  lay  it  down,  and  authority  to  resume 
it  again ;  because  I  have  received  this  command 
from  my  Father. — (19)  And  again  there  was  a 
division  among  the  Jews,  on  account  of  these  say- 
ings. (20)  And  many  of  them  said :  He  hath  a 
demon,  and  is  wholly  beside  himself;  why  hear  ye 
him?  (21)  But  others  said:  These  are  not  the 
discourses  of  a  demoniac :  can  a  demon  open  the 
eyes  of  one  blind  ? 

And  the  feast  of  the  dedication^  was  [held]  at^*- Sy.  "JZjOjj 
Jerusalem,    and   it  was  winter.     (23)  And   Jesus 
walked  in  the  temple,  in  the  porch  of  Solomon. 

21  (21)  And  the  Jews  gathered  around  him;  and  said 


11 

15 
10 


17 


19 


20 


21 


22 
23 


Sy.  U]]£) 


188 


JOHN,    XI. 


or,  perish, 


Sy.  "loi^ 


<=  Sy.  l-CivN 


to  him :  how  long  hoklest  thou  our  mind  in  sus- 
pense?    If  thou  art  the  Messiah,  tell  us  plainly. 

(25)  Jesus  answered,  and  said  to  them :  I  have  told  25 
you,  and  ye  did  not  believe.     The  works  which  I 

do  in  the  name  of  my  Father,  they  testify  of  me. 

(26)  But  ye  do  not  believe,  because  ye  are  not  of  26 
my  sheep,  as  I  have  said  to  you.     (27)  My  sheep  27 
hear  my  voice:  and  I  know  them:  and  they  go  af- 
ter me.     (28)  And  I  give  to  them  life  eternal:  and  28 
they  will  never  be  lost:^  nor  will  any  one  pluck 
them  fi-om  my  hand,    (29)  For  ray  Father,  who  gave  29 
[them]  to  me,  is  greater  than  all ;  nor  can  any  pluck 
from  my  Father's  hand.     (30)  I  and  my  Father  are  30 
one.     (31)  And  again  the  Jews  took  up  stones,  to  31 
stone  him.     (32)  Jesus  said  to  them :  Many  good  32 
works  have  1  showed  you  from  my  Father;   for 
which  of  those  works  do  ye  stone  me?     (33)  The  33 
Jews  said  to  him :  It  is  not  on  account  of  good 
works,  that  we  stone  thee :  but  because  thou  blas- 
phemest ;  and,  whilst  thou  art  a  man,  thou  makest 
thyself  (jrod.     (34)  Jesus  said  to  them :  Is  it  not  34 
written  in  your  law,  I  have  said.  Ye  are  gods?^ 
(35)  If  he  called  them  gods,  because  the  word  of  35 
Grod  was  with  them,  and  the  scripture  cannot  be 
nullified;  (36)  do  ye  say  to  him,  whom  the  Father  36 
hath  sanctified  and  sent  into  the  world.  Thou  blas- 
phemest;   because  I  said  to  you,  I  am  the  Son  of 
God?     (37)  And  if  I  do  not  the  works  of  my  Father,  37 
believe  me  not,     (38)  But  if  I  do  [them],  although  38 
ye  believe  not  me,  yet  believe  the  works ;  that  ye 
may  know  and  believe,  that  my  Father  is  in  me, 
and  I  in  my  Father. — (39)  And  again  they  sought  39 
to  lay  hold  of  him;  but  he  escaped  out  of  thi-ir 
hands;  (-10)  and  retired  to  the  other  side^  of  the  40 
Jordan,  to  the  place  where  John  at  first  baptized, 
and  tarried  there.     (41)  And  many  persons  came  41 
to  him:  and  they  said,  John  indeed  wrought  not 
even  one  sign;  but  every  thing  that  John  said  of 
this  man,  was  trua     (42)  And  many  believed  on  42 
him. 

And  a  certain  man  wns  sick,  Lazarus'^  of  the  XL 
town  of  Bethany,  the  brother  of  Mary  and  Martha. 
(2)  It  was  that  Mary  who  anointed  the  feet  of  Jesus     2 
with   perfume,  and  wiped   [them]  with   her  hair, 
whose  brother  Lazarus  was  sick.     (3)  xVnd  his  two     3 


JOHN,    XI. 


189 


sisters   sent    to  Jesus,    and   said :    Our  Lord,   he 

4  whom  thou  lovest  is  sick.  (•!)  iVnd  Jesus  said : 
This  sickness  is  not  that  of  death,  but  for  the 
glory  of  God,  that  the  Son  of  God  may  be  glori- 

5  lied  by  means  of  it.     (5)  Now  Jesus  loved  Martha 

6  and  Mary,  and  Lazarus.  (6)  And  when  he  heard 
that  he  was  sick,  he  remained  in  the  place  where 

7  he  was  two  days.  (7)  And  afterwards  he  said  to 
his  disciples :   Come,  let  us  go  again  into  Judaea. 

8  (8)  His  disciples  say  to  him :  Our  Rabbi,  the  Jews 
have  just  sought  to  stone  thee ;    and  goest  thou 

9  again  thither.  (9)  Jesus  said  to  them :  Are  there 
not  twelve  hours  in  the  day  ?  And  if  a  man  walk 
in   the   daytime,    he   stumbleth  not;    because   he 

10  seeth  the  light  of  the  world.  (10)  But  if  one 
walk  in  the  night,  he  stumbleth ;  because  there  is 

11  no  light  in  him.  (11)  These  things  said  Jesus,  and 
afterwards  he  said  to  them:   Lazarus  our  friend 

12  reposeth.'J  But  I  go  to  awake  him.  (12)  His  dis- 
ciples say  to  him:  Our  Lord,  if  he  sleepeth,  he  is 

13  recovering.  (13)  But  Jesus  spoke  of  his  death ; 
and  they  thought,  he  spoke  of  the  sleep  of  repose. 

14  (14)  Then  Jesus  said  to  them  explicitly :  Lazarus 

15  is  dead.  (15)  And  I  rejoice,  for  your  sakes,  that  I 
was  not  there ;  that  je  may  believe.     But  let  us  go 

16  there.  (16)  Thomas,  who  is  called  the  Twin,  said 
to  his  fellow-disciples :  Let  us  also  go  [and]  die 
with  him. 

17  And  Jesus  came  to  Bethany,  and  found  that  he 

18  had  been  in  the  grave  four  days.  (18)  Now  Beth- 
any was  near  to  Jerusalem,  distant  from  it  about 

19  fifteen  furlongs.  (19)  And  many  of  the  Jews  had 
come  to  Martha  and  Mar}^,  to  comfort  «=  them  con- 

20  cerning  their  brother.  (20)  And  Martha,  when 
she  heard  that  Jesus  was  coming,  went  out  to  meet 

21  him ;  but  Mary  was  sitting  in  the  house.  (21)  And 
Martha  said  to  Jesus :  My  Lord,  if  thou  hadst  been 

22  here,  my  brother  had  not  died.  (22)  But  even 
now,  I  know,  that  whatever  thou  wilt  ask  of  God, 

23  he  will  give  it  thee.     (23)  Jesus  said  to  her:  Thy 

24  brother  will  rise.  (24)  ]\Iartha  said  to  him:  I 
know,  that  he  will  rise  in  the  consolation, "^  at  the 

25  last  day.  (25)  Jesus  said  to  her :  I  am  the  conso- 
lation, and  life.     And  he  that  belie veth  in  me, 

26  though  he  should  die,  will  live.  (26)  And  every 
one  that.liveth,  and  believeth  in  me,  will  not  die 


^  Sy.  .'-^n» 


<=  Sy.  to  speak  to 
their  hearts. 


^  or,  resurrec- 
tion. 


for  ever.     Belie  vest  thou  this?     (27)  She  said  to  27 
him :  Yes,  my  Lord ;  I  beheve,  that  thou  art  the 
Messiah,  the  Son  of  God,   that  cometh  into   the 
world. — (28)  And  when  she  had  thus  said,  she  28 
went  and  called  her  sister  Mary,  secretly,  and  said 
to  her:  Our  Rabbi  hath  come,  and  calleth  for  thee. 
(29)  And   Mary,   when   she   heard    [it],    rose   up  29 
quickly,  and  went  to  meet  him.     (30)  And  Jesus  30 
had  not  3^et  entered  the  village,  but  was  in  the 
place  where  Martha  met   him.     (31)  Those  Jews  31 
also,  who  were  with  her  in  the  house  and  consoled 
her,  when  they  saw  that  Mary  rose  up  quickly  and 
went  out,  followed  after  her;  for  they  supposed, 
she  was  going  to  the  grave  to  weep.     (32)  And  32 
Mary,  when  she  came  where  Jesus  was  and  saw 
him,  fell  at  his  feet,  and  said  to  him :  If  thou  hadst 
been  here,  my  Lord,  my  brother  had  not   died. 
(33)  And  when  Jesus  saw  her  weeping,  and  the  33 
Jews  weeping  who  came  with  her,  he  was  moved 
in  spirit,  and  was   agitated.     (34)  And  he  said:  3-4 
Where  have  ye  laid  him  ?     They  say  to  him :  Our 
Lord,  come,  and  see.     (35)  And  the  tears  of  Jesus  35 
came.     (36)  And  the  Jews  said :  See,  how  much  he  36 
loved  him.     (37)  And  some  of  them  said:  Could  37 
not  he  who  opened  the  eyes  of  the  blind  man,  have 
caused  that  this  also  should  not  have  died? — (38)  38 
And  Jesus,  still  agitated  within,  came  to  the  grave. 
Now  the  grave  was  a  cave,  and  a  stone  was  laid 
upon  its   entrance.     (39)  And  Jesus  said:  Take  39 
away  this   stone.     Martha,    the   sister  of  the  de- 
ceased, said  to  him :  My  Lord,  by  this  time  he  is 
putrid;  for  four  days   have   elapsed.     (40)  Jesus  40 
said  to  her:    Did   I  not  tell  thee,   that  if  thou 
wouldst  believe,  thou   shouldst  see  the   glory  of 
God  ?     (41)  And  they  took  away  the  stone.     And  41 
Jesus  raised  his  eyes  on  high,  and  said:  Father,  I 
thank  thee  that  thou  hast  heard  me.     (42)  And  I  42 
know  that  thou  hearcst  me  alwa^'s ;  but  on  account 
of  this  multitude  that  standeth  here,  I  say  these 
things ;  that  they  may  believe,  that  thou  hast  sent 
me.     (43)  And  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  called  43 
with  a  loud  voice :  Lazarus,  come  forth !    (44)  And  44 
the  dead  man  came  forth,  with  his  hands  and  his 
feet  sAvathed  Avith  bandages,  and  his  foce  with  a 
na])kin.     Jesus  said  to  them :  Loose  him,  and  let 
him  f^o. 


JOHN,    XII. 


191 


45  And  many  of  tlie  Jews  who  had  come  to  Marj, 
when  they  saw  what  Jesus  did,  beheved  on  him. 

46  (46)  But  some  of  them  went  to  the  Pharisees,  and 

47  told  them  all  that  ^'esus  had  done. — (47)  And  the 
chief  priests  and  Pharisees  assembled  together,  and 
said  :  What  shall  we  do  ?     For  this  man  worketh 

48  many  signs.  (48)  And  if  we  thus  let  him  alone, 
all  the  people  will  believe  in  him ;  and  the  Ro- 
mans e  will  come,  and  will  take  away  our  place 

49  and  our  nation.  (49)  But,  one  of  them,  named 
Caiaphas,  was  the  high  priest  of  that  year  ;  and  he 

50  said  to  them  :  Ye  know  not  any  thing.  (50)  Nei- 
ther do  ye  consider,  that  it  is  expedient  for  us, 
that  one  man  die  for  the  people,  and  not  that  this 

51  whole  people  perish.  (51)  This  he  said,  however, 
not  from  the  promptings  of  his  own  mind  ;  but  be- 
ing the  high  priest  of  that  year,  he  prophesied,  that 

52  Jesus  was  about  to  die  for  the  people:  (52)  and 
not  only  for  the  people, ^  but  also  that  he  might 
collect  together   the   sons  of  God  that  were  dis- 

53  persed.     (53)  And  from  that  day,  they  plotted  to 

54  kill  him. — (54)  And  Jesus  did  not  walk  openly 
among  the  Jews ;  but  retired  from  them  to  a  place 
near  the  v/ilderness,  to  a  town  called  Ephraim ;  s 

55  and  there  he  abode  with  his  disciples. — (55)  And 
the  passover  of  the  Jews  drew  near:  and  many 
went  up  from  the  villages  to  Jerusalem,  before  the 

56  feast,  that  they  might  purify  themselves.  (56)  And 
they  sought  for  Jesus ;  and  they  said  one  to  another, 
in  the  temple :  What  think  ye  ?  that  he  will  not 

57  come  to  the  feast?  (57)  And  the  chief  priests  and 
the  Pharisees  had  commanded  that  if  any  one  knew 
Avhere  he  was,  he  should  make  it  known  to  them, 
that  they  might  take  hira. 

XII.  x\.nd  six  days  before  the  passover,  Jesus  came 
to  Bethany,  where  was  that  Lazarus  whom  Jesus 

2  raised  from  the  dead.  (2)  And  they  made  a  sup- 
per for  him  there:  and  INIartha  served,  and  Laz- 

3  arus  was  one  of  the  guests*  with  hira.  (3)  And 
Mary  took  an  alabaster  box  of  perfume  of  choice 
spikenard,  of  great  price  ;  and  anointed  the  feet  of 
Jesus ;  and  she  wiped  his  feet  with  her  hair.  And 
the  house  was  filled  with  the  odor  of  the  perfume. 

4  (4)  Then  said  Judas  Iscariot,  one  of  the  disciples,  he 

5  that  was  about  to  betray  him:  (5)  AThy  was  not 


Sy.*^. 


OOIJ 


''  i.  0.  the  Jews 
in  Judcca. 


f  Sy.  )iCl^'^'\ 


Sy.  rediners. 


192 


JOHN,    XII. 


''  or,  felt  into  it. 


Sy.  ]  1  S  »o] 


this  ointment  sold  for  tlirce  liuudred  denarii,  and 
given  to  the  poor  ?     (6)  And  this  he  said,  not  be-     6 
cause  he  cared  for  the  poor,  but  because  he  was  a 
thief,  and  held  the  purse,  and  carried  what  was  put^ 
in  it.     (7)  Bat  Jesus  said :  Let  her  alone ;  she  hath     7 
kept  it  for  the  day  of  my  burial.     (8)  For  the  poor     8 
are  always  with  you,  but  1  am  not  with  you  always. 
— (9)  And  great  multitudes  of  the  Jews  heard  that     9 
he  was   there :    and    they  came,   not  only  on  ac- 
count of  Jesus,  but  also  that  they  might  see  Laz- 
arus, whom  he  raised  from  the  dead.     (10)   And  10 
the   chief  priests  deliberated  about  killing  even 
Lazarus:  (11)  because  many  of  the  Jews,  on  his  11 
account,  went  and  believed  in  Jesus. 

And  the  next  day,  a  great  multitude  who  had  12 
come  to  the  feast,  when  they  heard  that  Jesus  was 
coming  to  Jerusalem,  (13)  took  boughs  of  palm-  13 
trees,  and  went  out  to  meet  him.     And  they  cried, 
and  said:  Hosanna,^  Blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in 
the  name  of  the  Lord,  the  king  of  Israel !    (14)  And  14 
Jesus  found  an  ass,  and  sat  upon  it ;  as  it  is  written, 
(15)  Fear  not,  daughter  of  Sion.    Behold,  thy  king  15 
cometh  to  thee ;    and  he  rideth  upon  a  colt,  the 
foal  of  an  ass.     (16)  These  things  understood  not  16 
his  disciples,  at  that  time ;    but  when   Jesus  was 
glorified,  then  his  disciples  remembered  that  these 
things  were  written  of  him.  and  that  they  did  them 
to  him. — (17)  And  the  multitude  that  had  been  with  17 
him,  testifiea  that  he  had  called  Lazarus  from  the 
grave,  and  raised  him  from  the  dead.     (18)  And  18 
for  this  reason,  great  multitudes  went  out  to  meet 
him,  as  they  had  heard  that  he  wrought  this  sign. 
(19)   But  the  Pharisees  said,  one  to  another:  i)o  19 
ye  see,  that  ye  are  gaining  nothing?     For,  lo,  the 
whole  world  is  going  after  him. 

And   there  were  also  among  the  people,  some  20 
who  had  come  up  to  worship  at  the  feast.   (21)  These  21 
came,  and  approached  Pliilip,  who  was  of  Bethsai- 
da  in  Galilee,  and  said  to  him:   My  lord,  we  are 
desirous  to  see  Jesus.     (22)  Philip  came  and  told  22 
Andrew;    and   Andrew   and   Philip   told   Jesus. 

(23)  And  Jesus  answered,  and  said  to  them:  The  23 
hour  is  come  that  the  Son  of  man  should  be  glorified. 

(24)  Verily,  verily,  I  say  to  you.  That  a  kernel  of  24 
wheat,  unless  it  fall  and  die  in  the  ground,  rcmaineth 
alone ;  but  if  it  die,  it  produceth  numerous  fruits. 


JOHN,    XII. 


193 


25  (25)  He  that  loveth  his  life,'^  will  lose  it;  and  he 
that  hatetli  his  life,  in  this  world,  will  preserve  it 

26  unto  lifee  everlasting.  (26)  If  any  one  is  servant 
to  me,  he  will  come  after  me;  and  where  I  am, 
there  also  will  my  servant  be.     Him  that  serveth 

27  me,  will  the  Father  honor.  (27)  Behold,  now  is 
my  souK  troubled ;  and  what  shall  I  say  ?  My 
Father,  deliver  me  from  this  hour  ?     But  for  this 

28  very  cause,  came  I  to  this  hour.  (28)  Father, 
glorify  thy  name !  And  a  voice  was  heard  from 
heaven :  I  have  glorified  [it]  ;   and  I  will  glorify 

29  [it]  again.  (29)  And  the  multitude  standing  by, 
heard  [it] ;  and  they  said :  There  was  thunder. 
But    others    said:    An    angel    spoke   with    him. 

30  (3-0)  Jesus  answered,  and  said  to  them :  This  voice 

31  was  not  for  mj  sake,  but  for  yours.  (31)  Now  is 
the  judgment  of  this  world  :  now  the  rulers  of  this 

32  world  is  cast  out.  (32)  And  I,  when  I  am  lifted 
up   from   the   earth,    will   draw   all   men  to  me. 

33  (33)  And  this  he  said,  to  show  by  what  manner  of 

34  death,  he  was  to  die. — (31)  The  multitude  said  to 
him :  We  have  heard  from  the  law,  that  the  Mes- 
siah abideth  for  ever  :  [and]  how  sayest  thou,  that 
the  Son  of  man  is  to  be  lifted  up  ?     Who  is  this 

35  Son  of  man  ?  (35)  Jesus  said  to  them :  A  short 
time  longer,  the  light  is  with  you.  Walk,  while  ye 
have  the  light,  lest  the  darkness  overtake  you.  He 
that  walketh  in  the  dark,  knoweth  not  whither  he 

36  goeth.  (36)  While  the  light  is  with  you,  confide 
in  the  light ;  that  ye  may  be  children  of  the  light. 
— These  things  said  Jesus,  and  departed,  and  con- 
cealed himself  from  them. 

37  And  although  he  wrought  all  these  signs  before 

38  them,  they  believed  him  not ;  (38)  that  the  word 
of  Isaiah  the  prophet  might  be  fulfilled,  who  said : 
My  Lord;  who  hath  believed  our  report?     And 

39  to  whom  is  the  arm  of  the  Lord  revealed  ?  (39)  For 
this  reason  they  could  not  believe,  because  Isaiah 

40  said  again :  (10)  They  have  blinded  their  eyes,  and 
darkened  their  hearts ;  that  they  might  not  see 
with  their  eyes,  and  understand  with  their  heart, 
and    be    converted ;    and    I    should   heal    them, 

41  (41)  These  things  spake  Isaiah,  when  he  saw  his 

42  glory,  and  spoke  of  him.  (42)  And  of  the  chiefs^ 
also,  many  believed  on  him ;  but  on  account  of  the 
Pharisees,  they  did  not  confess  [him],  lest  they 


Sy.  .»  «»  gM 


e  Sy.  "JJODJ] 


Sy.  V^V 


194 


JOHN,    XIII. 


'  or,  save. 


t  Sy.     X*-^ 


Sy.  U^CD 


^  Gr.  Simon  Pe- 
ter. 


should  be  put  out  of  the  synagogue ;  (43)  for  they  43 
loved  the  praise  of  men,  more  than  the  praise  of 
God. — (44)  And  Jesus  cried,  and  said:   He  that  44 
believeth  in  me,  believeth  not  in  me,  but  in  him 
that  sent  me,     (45)  And  he  that  seeth  me,  seeth  45 
him  that  sent  me.      (46)    I  have  come  into  the  46 
world,  a  light,  that  whoever  believeth  in  me,  might 
not  abide  in  darkness.     (47)  And  whoever  sliall  47 
hear  my  words,  and  not  observe  them,  I  judge  him 
not;  for  I  did  not  come  to  judge  the  world,  but  to 
vivify'  the  world.      (48)    Whoever  rejecteth  me,  48 
and  receiveth  not  my  words,  there  is  one  to  judge 
him ;  the  word  which  I  speak,  will  judge  him,  at 
the  last  day,     (49)  For  I  have  not  spoken  from  49 
myself;  but  the  Father  who  sent  me,  he  gave  me 
commandment,  what  I  should  speak,  and  what  I 
should  say.     (50)  And  I  know  that  his  command-  50 
ment  is  lifek  eternal.    Therefore,  these  thino-s  which 
I   speak,    as  my  Father  hath  said   to   me,  so   I 
speak. 

And  before  the  feast  of  the  passover,  Jesus  XIII, 
knew  that  the  hour  had  come  when  he  should  de- 
part from  this  world  unto  the  Father.     And  he 
loved  his  own  [people],  who  were  in  the  world; 
and  he  loved  them  unto  the  end.     (2)  And  when     2 
the  supper  was  passed,  it  had  been  injected  by 
Satan=>'  into  the  heart  of  Judas  Iscariot,  the  son  of 
Simon,  to  betray  him.     (3)  And  Jesus,  because  he     8 
knew  that  the  Father  had  given  all  things  into  his 
hands ;  and  that  he  came  out  from  the  Father,  and 
was  going  to  God;  (4)  arose  from  the  supper,  and     4 
laid  aside  his  long  garments,  and  took  a  linen  cloth, 
and  wrapped  it  about  his  loins;  (5)  and  poured     5 
water  into  a  wash-basin,  and  began  to  wash  the  feet 
of  his  disciples :  and  he  wiped  them  with  the  linen 
cloth  with  which  he  had  girded  his  loins.     (6)  And     6 
when  he  came  to  Simon  Cephas, i^  Simon  said  to 
liim:  Dost  thou,  my  Lord,  wash  my  feet  for  me? 
(7)  Jesus  answered,  and  said  to  him :  What  I  do,     7 
thou  understandest  not  now:   but  liereafter  thou 
wilt  understand.     (8)  Simon  Cephas  said  to  him :     8 
Never  shalt  thou  wash  my  feet.     Jesus  said  to  him : 
Unless  I  wash  thee,  thou  hast  no  part  with  me. 
(9)  Simon  Cephas  said  to  him :  Then,  my  Loi'd,  not     9 
my  feet  only  shalt  thou  Avash,  but  also  my  hands 


JOHN,    XIII. 


195 


10 


11 

12 


and  my  head.  (10)  Jesus  said  to  Lira:  He  tliat 
hath  bathed, c  needeth  not  but  to  wash  his  feet;  for 
he  is  all  clean.  And  ye  also  are  clean ;  but  not  all 
of  you.  (11)  For  Jesus  knew,  who  would  betray 
him :  therefore  he  said,  Ye  are  not  all  clean. — 
(12)  And  when  he  had  washed  their  feet,  he  re- 
sumed his  long  garments,  d  and  reclined.  And  he 
said  to  them :   Understand  ye  what  I  have  done  to 

13  you  ?     (13)  Ye  call  me,  Our  Rabbi,  and  Our  Lord ; 

14  and  ye  speak  well ;  for  I  am  so.  (14)  If  then  I, 
your  Lord  and  your  Rabbi,  have  washed  your  feet, 
how  much  more  ought  ye  to  wash  the  feet  of  one 
another  ?  (15)  For  I  have  given  you  this  example, 
that  ye  might  do,  as  I  have  done  to  you.  (16) 
Verily,  verily,  I  say  to  you,  That  no  servant  is 
greater  than  his  lord;  and  no  legate^  is  greater 
than  he  who  sent  him.     (17)  If  ye  knoAv   these 

18  things,  happy  will  ye  be  if  ye  do  them.  (18)  Not 
of  you  all,  do  I  speak:  I  know  whom  I  have 
chosen.  But  that  the  scripture  may  be  fulfilled. 
He  that  eateth  bread  with  me,  hath  lifted  his  heel 
against  me.  (19)  From  this  time,  I  tell  you,  before 
it  occurs,  that  when  it  shall  occur,  ye  may  know! 
that  I  am  he.  (20)  Verily,  verily,  I  say  to  you:; 
He  that  receiveth  him  whom  I  send,  receiveth  me; 
and  he  that  receiveth  me,  receiveth  him  that  sent 


15 
16 


17 


19 


20 


21 


22 

23 

24 
25 
26 


27 


Sy.  "i*,KrD> 


Sy- 


Sy.  ]j^  >\  9 


me. 


These  things  said  Jesus,  and  he  was  agitated  in 
his  spirit ;f  and  he  testified,  and  said:  Verily, 
verily,  I  say  to  you,  That  one  of  you  will  betray 
me.  (22)  And  the  disciples  stared  at  one  another ; 
because  they  knew  not,  of  Avhom  he  spake.  (23)  And 
there  was  one  of  his  disciples,  who  was  reclining 
on  his  bosom,  he  whom  Jesus  loved ;  (24)  to  him 
Simon  Cephas  beckoned,  that  he  should  ask  him, 
who  it  was  of  whom  he  spoke.  (25)  And  that 
disciple  fell  upon  the  breast  of  Jesus,  and  said  to 
liim:  My  Lord,  Avhich  is  he?  (26)  Jesus  an- 
swered and  said:  He  it  is,  to  Avhom  I  give  the 
bread  w^hen  I  have  dipped  it.  And  Jesus  dipped 
the  bread,  and  gave  it  to  Judas  Iscariot,  the  son  of 
Simon.  (27)  And  after  the  bread,  then  Satan 
entered  into  him.     And  Jesus  said  to  him :  What 

28  thou  doest,  do  quickly.     (28)  And  no  one  of  those 
reclining,   knew,  wherefore   he  said  this  to   him. 

29  (29)  For  some  of  them  supposed,  because  the  purse 


f  Sy.  ai^OiS::) 


196 


JOHN,    XIV. 


s  Sy. 
h  Sy. 

cnsj  OTA 


30 


31 
32 


was  in  the  hands  of  Judas,  that  Jesus  expressly 
charged  hiiii__to  buy  something  needful  for  the 
feast,  or  that  he  should  give  something  to  the  poor. 
(30)  And  Judas  took  the  bread  at  once,  and  went 
out  of  the  house.  And  it  was  night  when  he  went 
out. 

And  Jesus  said  :  jSTow  is  the  Son  of  man  glori- 
fied ;s  and  God  is  glorified  in  him.  (32)  And  if 
God  is  glorified  in  him,  God  will  glorify  him  in 
himself;''  and  will  glorify  him  speedily.  (33)  My  33 
children,  a  little  longer  I  am  Avith  you ;  and  ye 
will  seek  for  me ;  and,  as  I  said  to  the  Jews, 
Whither  I  go  ye  cannot  come,  so  I  now  say  to  you. 
(34)  A  new  commandment  I  give  to  you,  that  ye  34 
be  affectionate  to  each  other.  As  I  have  loved 
you,  do  ye  also  love  one  another.  (35)  By  this 
will  every  one  know  that  ye  are  my  disciples,  if 
ye  have  love  for  each  other. — (36)  Simon  Cephas 
said  to  him  :  Our  Lord,  whither  goest  thou  ?  Je- 
sus answered,  and  said  to  him :  Whither  I  go,  thou 
canst  not  now  come  after  me  ;  but  thou  wilt  at  last 
come.  (37)  Simon  Cephas  said  to  him:  My  Lord, 
why  can  I  not  come  after  thee?  I  would  lay 
down  my  life  for  thee.  (38)  Jesus  said  to  him:  38 
Wouldst  thou  lay  down  thy  life  for  me?  Verily, 
verily,  I  say  to  thee.  The  cock  will  not  crow,  until 
thou  hast  three  times  denied  me. 

Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled :  believe  in  XIV. 
God,  and,   believe  in  me.      (2)  There  are  many     2 
mansions  in  the  house  of  m}''  Father :  and  if  not,  I 
would  have  told  you  ;  for  I  go  to  prepare  a  place 
for  you.     (3)  And  if  I  go  to  prepare  for  j'ou  a     3 
place,  I  will  come  again  and  take  you  to  myself; 
that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be  also.     (4)  And    4 
whither  I  go,  ye  know ;  and  the  way  ye  know. — 
(5)  Thomas  said  to  him:  Our  Lord,  we  know  not 


60 


36 


37 


whither  thou  goest;  and  how  can  we  know  the 
way  ?     (6)  Jesus  said  to  him :  I  am  the  way,  and     6 
truth,  and  life :  no  one  cometli  unto  my  Father, 
but  by  me.     (7)  If  ye  had  known  me,  ye  would     7 
also  have  known  my  Father:  and  henceforth,  ye 
know  him,  and  have  seen  him. — (8)  Philip  said  to     8 
him :   Our  Lord,  show  us  the  Father,  and  it  will 
suffice   for  us.     (9)   Jesus   said   to  him:    Have  I     9 
been  all  this  time  with  you,  and  hast  thou  not 


JOHN,    XIV. 


197 


known  me,  Philip?     He  that  seeth  me,  seeth  the 
Father  :  and  how  sayest  thou,  Show  us  the  Father? 

10  (10)  Believest  thou  not,  that  I  am  in  my  Father, 
and  my  Father  in  me?  And  the  words  which  I 
speak,  I  speak  not  from  myself:  but  my  Father, 
who    dwelleth   in   me, a-    he    doeth    these    works. 

11  (11)  Believe,  that  I  am  in  my  Father,  and  my 
Father  in  me.     And  if  not,  believe,  at  least,  on 

12  account  of  the  works.  (12)  Verily,  verily,  I  say  to 
you  :  He  that  believeth  in  me,  the  works  which  I 
do,  will  he  also  do.     And  greater  tlmn  these  will 

13  he  do,  because  I  go  unto  my  Fatlier.  (13)  And 
what  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name,  I  will  do  for  3^ou  ; 

14  that  the  Father  may  be  glorified  in  his  Son.  (14) 
And  if  ye  shall  ask  of  me,  in  my  name,  I  Avill  do 

15  [it]. — (15)  If  ye   love   me,    keep  my  commands. 

16  (16)  And  I  will  ask  of  my  Father,  and  he  will 
give  you  another  Comforter, ^  that  he  maj^  be  with 

17  you  for  ever,  (17)  the  Spirit  of  truth ;  whom  the 
world  cannot  receive,  because  it  seeth  him  not,  and 
knoweth  him  not:  but  ye  know  him,  because  he 

18  abideth  with  you,  and  is  in  you.  (18)  I  shall  not 
leave  you  orphans :  for  I  shall  come  to  you  in  a 

19  little  while.  (19)  And  the  world  will  not  see  me ; 
but  ye  will  see  me.     Because  I  live,  ye  will  live 

20  also.  (20)  In  that  day  ye  will  know,  that  I  am  in 
my  Father;  and  that  ye  are  in  me,  and  I  in  you. 

21  (21)  He,  with  whom  are  my  commands,  and  who 
keepeth  them,  he  it  is  that  loveth  me.  And  he 
that  loveth  me,  will  be  loved  by  my  Father :  and 
I  will  love  him,  and  will  manifest  myself  to  him. 

22  — (22)  Judas, — not  Iscariot, — said  to  him :  My 
Lord,  how  is  it  that  thou  art  to  manifest  thyself  to 

23  us,  and  not  to  the  world?  (23)  Jesus  answered, 
and  said  to  him :  He  that  loveth  me,  observeth  my 
instruction ;«  and  my  Father  will  love  him,  and  we 
will  come  to  him,  and  make  our  abode  with  him. 

24  (24)  But  he  that  loveth  me  not,  observeth  not  my 
instruction.     And  the  instruction  which  ye  hear,  is 

25  not  mine,  but  the  Father's  who  sent  me. — (25)  These 
things  have  I  said  to  you,  while  I  was  with  you. 

26  (26)  But  the  Comforter,  the  Holy  Spirit,  whom  the 
Father  will  send  in  my  name,  he  will  teach  you 
every  thing,  and  will  remind  you  of  all  that  I  say  to 

27  you.  (27)  Peacc^  I  leave  with  you ;  my  peace  I 
give  to  you.     It  is  not  as  the  world^  giyeth,  that  I 


Sy. 


Sy. 

from  Gr. 
'rfapay.XriTog. 


or,  discourse. 


Sy.  JV^N  * 
Sy.  ]V)\s 


198 


fSy. 
0TJJ105] 


Sy.  words 


^  or,  lovers. 


Sy.  .^V)  v>^ 


JOHN,    XV. 

give  to  you.     Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,  nor 
be  afraid.     (28)  Ye  have  heard  what  I  said   to  28 
you  that  I  go  away,  and  come  [again]  to  you.     If 
ye  had  loved  me,  ye  would  have  rejoiced,  that  I  go 
to  my  Father;  for  my  Father  is  greater   than   I. 
(29)  And  now,  lo,  I  have  told  you,  before  it  occur-  29 
reth ;    so  that  when  it  shall  have  occurred,  ye  may 
believe.     (30)  Hereafter  I  shall  not  converse  much  30 
with  you ;  for  the  ruler^  of  this  world  cometh,  and 
hath  nothing  in  me.     (31)  But  that  the  world?  may  31 
know,  that  I  love  my  iather,  and  as  my  Father 
commanded  me,  so  I  do.     Arise ;  let  us  go  hence. 

I  am  the  true  vine ;  and  my  Father  is  the  culti-XV. 
vator.     (2)  Every  branch  in  me,  which   yieldeth     2 
not  fruits,   he  taketh  it  away:    and   that   which 
yieldeth  fruits,  he  cleanseth  it,  that  it  may  yield 
more  fruits.     (3)  Ye  henceforth  are  clean,  on  ac-     3 
count   of  the   discourse   I   have   held   with   you. 
(4)  Abide  in  me,  and  I  in  you.     As  the  branch     4 
cannot  yield  fruits  of  itself,  unless  it  abide  in  the 
vine;  so  also,  neither  can  ye,  unless  ye  abide  in 
me.     (5)  I  am  the  vine,  and  ye  are  the  branches.     5 
He  that  abideth  in  me,  and  I  in  him,  he  yieldeth 
much  fruit;  for  without  me,  ye  can  do  nothing. 
(6)  And  if  a  man  abide  not  in  me,  he  is  cast  forth     6 
as  a  withered  branch ;  and  they  gather  it  up,  and 
cast  it  into  the  fire  to  be  burned.     (7)  But  if  ye     7 
shall  abide  in  me,  and  my  instructions^^-  shall  abide 
in  you,  whatever  ye  shall  be  pleased  to  ask,  it  will 
be  given  to  you. — (8)  In  this  is  the  Father  glori-     8 
fied,  that  ye  bear  much  fruit;  and  ye  Avill  be  my 
disciples.     (9)  As  my  Father  hath  loved  me,  I  also     9 
have  loved  you  :  abide  ye  in  the  love  of  me.    (10)  If  10 
ye  shall  keep  my  commands,  ye  will  abide  in  the 
love  of  me,  as  I  have  kept  the  commands  of  my 
Father,  and  abide  in  his  love.     (11)  These  things  11 
have  I  spoken  to  you,  that  my  joy  may  be  in  you, 
and  that  your  joy  may  be  complete.     (12)  This  is  12 
my  command,  that  ye  love  one  another,  as  I  have 
loved   you.     (13)  There  is  no  greater  love  than  13 
this,  that  a  man  lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends.'' 
(14)  Ye  are  my  friends,  if  ye  do  all  that  I  command  14 
you.     (15)  I  no  longer  call  3'-ou  servants;  because  15 
a  servant  knoweth  not  what  his  lord  docth  :  but  I 
have  called  you  my  friends  ;«=  because,  whatever  I 


JOHN,    XVI. 


199 


have  heard  from  my  Father,  I  have  made  known 

16  to  you.  (16)  It  is  not  ye  that  chose  me,  but  I  that 
have  chosen  you ;  and  I  have  appointed  you,  that 
ye  also  should  go  and  yield  fruits,  and  that  your 
fruits  should  continue;  so  that  whatever  ye  may 
ask  of  my  Father  in  my  name,  he  may  give  it  you. 

17  (17)  These  things  I  command  you,  that  ye  should 

18  love  one  another. — (18)  And  if  the  world  hate  you, 

19  know  ye,  that  it  hated  me  before  you.  (19)  And 
if  ye  were  of  the  world,  the  world  would  love  what 
is  of  it.  But  ye  are  not  of  the  world,  for  I  have 
chosen  you  out  of  the  world ;  for  this  cause,  the 

20  world  hateth  you.  (20)  Remember  the  word  that 
I  spoke  to  you,  That  there  is  no  servant,  who  is 
greater  than  his  lord.  If  they  have  persecuted  me, 
they  will  also  persecute  you ;  and  if  they  have  ob- 
served my  teaching,  they  will  also  observe  yours. 

21  (21)  But  all  these  things  will  they  do  to  you,  on 
account  of  my  name,  because  they  know  not  him 

22  that  sent  me.  (22)  If  I  had  not  come  and  dis- 
coursed with  them,  sin  would  not  have  been  to 
them ;  but  now  there  is  no  excuse  for  their  sins. 

23  (23)  He  that  hateth  me,  hateth  my  Father  also. 
21  (2-1)  If  I  had  not  wrought  before  them  works  which 

no  other  j^erson  ever  did,  sin  would  not  have  been 
to  them :  but  now  they  have  seen,  and  have  hated, 

25  both  me  and  my  Father ;  (25)  so  that  in  them  will 
be  fulfilled  the  word  Avhicli  is  written  in  their  law : 

26  They  hated  me,  without  a  cause. ^ — (26)  But  when 
the  Comforter  shall  come,  whom  I  will  send  to  you 
from  my  Father,  that  Spirit  of  truth  who  proceed- 

27  eth  from  the  Father,  He  will  testify  of  me.  (27) 
And  do  ye  also  testify  ;  for  ye  have  been  with  me 
from  the  beginning. 

XVL     These  things  have  I  said  to  you,  that  ye  may 

2  not  be  stumbled.  (2)  For  they  will  eject  you  from 
their  synagogues  ;  and  the  hour  will  come,  that 
whoever  shall  kill  you,  will  suppose  that  he  pre- 

3  senteth  an  offering  to  God. — (3)  And  these  things 
will  they  do,  because  they  have  not  known  either 

4  my  Father,  or  me.  (4)  These  things  have  I  spoken 
to  you,  that  when  the  time  of  them  cometh,  ye  may 
recollect,  that  I  told  3-0 u  of  them.  And  I  did  not 
tell  you  these  things  from  the  beginning,  because  I 

5  was  with  you.     (5)  But  now,  I  am  going  to  Ilim 


gratuitously. 


200 


JOHN,    XVI, 


•  Sy. 

''  or,  rebuke. 


Sy.  ]jao5l 


<>Sy. 


•  Sy.  ]  «  1;  «-> 


that  sent  me;  and  none  of  youasketh  me.  Whither 
goest  thou?      (6)    And  because  I  have  told  you     6 
these  thing.s,  sorrow  hath  come  and  hath  filled  your 
hearts.      (7)    But  I  tell   you  the  truth,  that  it  is     7 
profitable  for  you  that  I  go  away ;    for,  if  I  go 
not  away,  the  Comforter^  will  not  come  to  you; 
but  if  I  go,  I  will  send  him  to  you.     (8)  And  when     8 
he  is  come,  he  will  convict''  the  world  of  sin,  and 
of  righteousness,  and    of  judgment.     (9)    Of  sin,     9 
because  they  believe  not  in  me :  (10)  and  of  righ-  10 
teousness,  because  I  go  to  my  Father,  and  ye  see 
me  no  more:    (11)  and  of  judgment,  because  the  11 
ruler"^  of  this  world  is  judged.     (12)  Moreover,  I  12 
have  much  to  say  to  you :  but  ye  cannot  compre- 
hend [it]  now.     (13)  But  when  the  Spirit  of  truth  13 
shall  come,  he  will  lead  you  into  all  the  truth. 
For  he  will  not  speak  from  his  own  mind ;    but 
whatever  he  heareth,  that  will  he  speak :  and  he 
will  make  known  to  you  things  to  come.     (11)  He  14 
will  glorify  me ;  because  he  will  receive  of  what  is 
mine,  and  will  show  [it]  to  you.     (15)  Whatever^^  15 
the  Father  hath,  is  mine:  therefore  said  I  to  you, 
that  he  will  receive  of  what  is  mine,  and  will  show 
[it]  to  you. — (16)  A  little  while,  and  ye  will  not  16 
see  me;  and  again  a  little  while,  and  ye  will  see 
me;  because  I  go  to  the  Father.     (17)  And  his  dis-  17 
ciples  said  one  to  another :  What  is  this  that  he 
saith  to  us,  A  little  while,  and  ye  will  not  see  me, 
and  again  a  little  while,  and  ye  will  see  me,  because 
I  go  to  my  Father  ?     (18)  And  they  said :  What  18 
is  this  little  while,  of  which  he  speaketh?     We 
know  not  what  he  saith.     (19)   And  Jesus  knew,  19 
that  they  desired  to  ask  him ;  and  he  said  to  them : 
Are  ye  debating  with  each  other,  of  what  I  said  to 
you,  A  little  while,  and  ye  will  not  see  me,  and 
again  a  little  while,  and  ye  will  see  me?   (20)  Veril}',  20 
verily,  I  say  to  you,  That  ye  will  weep  and  lament: 
and  the  world  will  rejoice,  while  to  you  will  be 
sorrow.     But  your  sorrow  will  be  turned  to  joy. 
(21)  A  woman,  in  bringing  forth,  hath  sorrow,  for  21 
the  day  of  her  travail  hath  come :  but  when  she 
hath  brought  forth  a  son,  she  remembereth  not  her 
anguish,  because  of  the  joy  that  a  human  beings  is 
born  into  the  world.     (22)  Ye  also  now  have  sor-  22 
row  ;  but  I  will  see  you  again,  and  your  heart  will 
rejoice,  and  no  one  will  deprive  you  of  your  joy. 


JOHN,    XVII. 


201 


23  (23)  And  in  that  day  ye  will  ask  me  nothing. 
Verily,  verily,  I  say  to  you,  That  whatsoever  ye 
shall  ask  of  my  Father  in  my  name,  he  will  give  to 

24  you.  (24)  Hitherto  ye  have  asked  nothing  in  my 
name.     Ask,  and  ye  will  receive;    that  your  joy 

25  may  be  complete. — (25)  These  things  have  I  spoken 
to  you  in  allegories  •/  but  the  hour  will  come,  when 
I  shall  not  speak  to  you  in  allegories,  but  I  will 

26  speak  to  you  plainly  of  the  Father.  (26)  In  that 
day  ye  will  ask  in  my  name ;  and  I  do  not  say  to 

27  you,  that  I  will  pray  to  the  Father  for  you;  (27)  for 
the  Father  himself  loveth  you,  because  ye  have 
loved  me,  and  have  believed  that  I  proceeded  from 

28  the  presence  of  the  Father.  (28)  I  proceeded  forth 
from  before  the  Father,  and  came  into  the  world ; 
and  again  I  leave  the  world,  and  go  to  the  Father. 

29  — (29)  His  disciples  say  to  him :  Lo,  now  thou 
speakest  plainly,   and  thou   utterest  no  allegory. 

30  (30)  Now  know  we,  that  thou  knowest  every  thing ;? 
and  thou  hast  no  need,  that  any  one  should  ask 
thee:  by  this  we  believe,  that  thou  didst  proceed 

31  from  God.    (31)  Jesus  said  to  them :  Do  ye  believe? 

32  (32)  Behold,  the  hour  cometh,  and  hath  now  coiije, 
when  ye  will  be  dispersed,  each  to  his  place ;  and 
ye  will  leave  me  alone.     But  I  am  not  alone,  for 

33  the  Father  is  with  me.  (33)  These  things  have  I 
said  to  you,  that  in  me  ye  might  have  peace.  In 
the  world  }' e  will  have  trouble :  but,  take  courage, 
I  have  vanquished  the  world. 

XVII.  These  things  spake  Jesus,  and  lifted  up  his 
eyes  to  heaven,  and  said :  My  Father,  the  hour  is 
come :  glorify  thy  Son,  that  thy  Son  may  glorify 

2  thee.  (2)  As  thou  hast  given  him  authority'*'  over 
all  flesh,  that  he  might  give  life  eternal  to  as  many 

3  as  thou  hast  given  him.  (3)  And  this  is  life  eter- 
nal, that  they  may  know  thee,  that  thou  art  the 
only  true  God,  and  whom  thou  hast  sent,  Jesus 

4  Messiah.     (4)  I  have  glorified  thee  on  the  earth 
the  work''  which  thou  gavest  me  to  do,  I  have 

5  finished.  (5)  And  now,  my  Father,  glorify  thou 
me,  with  that  glory  which  t  had  with  thee  before 

6  the  world  was. — (6)  I  have  made  known  thy  name 
to  the  men,  whom  thou  gavest  me  from  the  world : 
thine  the}^  were,  and  thou  gavest  them  to  me ;  and 

7  they  have  kept  thy  word.     (7)  Now  I^  have  known, 


Sy.  ]L]\£1^ 


e  Sv. 


Sy.M^^ 


>Q-» 


Gr.  they. 


202 


JOHN,    XVII. 


^  or,  tchich 
name. 


e  Sy.  \2r^]. 


^cnZwliiQ^ 


that  whatever  thou  hast  given  me,  was  from  thee. 

(8)  For,  the  words  thou  gavest  to  me,  I  have  given     8 
to  them ;  and  they  have  received  them,  and  have 
known  certainly,  that  I  came  from  thy  presence ; 
and  they  have  believed  that  thou  didst  send  me. 

(9)  And  I  pray  for  them ;  it  is  not  for  the  world     9 
that  I  pray,  but  for  them  whom  thou  hast  given 
me,  for  they  are  thine.     (10)  And  all  that  is  mine  10 
is  thine,  and  what  is  thine  is  mine;  and  I  am  glori- 
fied in  them.     (11)  Henceforth  I  am  not  in   the  11 
world ;  but  these  are  in  the  world,  and  I  go  to  thee. 
Holy  Father,  keep  them  in  that  thy  name,  Avhich'^ 
thou  hast  given  to  me ;  that  they  may  be  one,  as 
we  are.     (12)  While  I  have  been  with  them  in  the  12 
world,  I  have  kept  them  in  thy  name.     Those  thou 
gavest  me,  have  I  kept;  and  none  of  them  is  lost, 
but  the  son  of  perdition, ^  that  the  scripture  might 

be  fulfilled.     (13)  But  now  I  come  to  thee;  and  13 
these  things  I  speak  in  the  world,  that  my  joy  may 
be  complete  in  them.     (14)  I  have  given  them  th}-  1-1 
word:    and  the  world   hath  hated  them,  because 
they  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the 
world.     (15)  I  pray  not,  that  thou  wouldst  take  15 
them  out  of  the  world,  but  that  thou  wouldst  keep 
them   from  evil:     (16)  for   they   are  not   of  the  16 
world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world.     (17)  Father,  17 
sanctify  them  by  thy  truth,  thy  word  is  the  truth. 
(18)  As  thou  didst  send  me  into  the  world,  so  have  18 
I  also  sent  them  into  the  world.     (19)  And   for  19 
their  sakes  I  sanctify  myself,  that  they  also  may  be 
sanctified  by  the  truth. — (20)  And  it  is  not  for  20 
them   only  that  I  pray,  but   also  for  those  who 
shall    believe    in    me    through    their    discourse  ;*" 
(21)  that  they  all  may  be  one ;  as  thou,  ni}^  Father,  21 
[art]  in  me,  and  I  in  thee ;  that  they  also  may  be 
one  in  us ;  so  that  the  world  may  believe,  that  thou 
didst  send  me.     (22)  And  the  glory  which  thou  22 
gavest  me,  I  have  given  them ;  that  they  may  be 
one,  as  we  are  one.     (23)  I  in  them,  and  thou  in  23 
me ;  that  they  may  be  perfected  into  one  ;  and  that 
the  world  may  know  tliat  thou  didst  send  me,  and 
that  thou  hast  loved  them  as  also  thou  hast  loved 
me.     (24)     Father,  I  desire  that  those  whom  tiiou  24 
hast  given  me,  may  also  be  with  me  where  I  am ; 
that  they  may  see  that  glory  of  mine  which  thou 
hast  given  me,  as  thou  lovedst  me  before  the  foun- 


JOHN,    XVIII. 


203 


25  dation  of  the  world.  (25)  My  rigliteous  Father, 
the  world  hath  not  known  thee ;  but  I  have  known 
thee,  and  these  have  known,  that  thou  didst  send 

26  me.  (26)  And  I  have  made  known  to  them  thy 
name ;  and  I  will  make  it  known ;  so  that  the  love, 
with  which  thou  lovedst  me,  may  be  in  them,  and 
I  in  them, 

XYIII.  These  things  spake  Jesus,  and  went  forth 
Avith  his  disciples  over  the  brook  Cedron,a-  where 
there  was  a  garden,  into  Avhich  he  and  his  disciples 

2  entered.  (2)  And  Judas  also,  the  betrayer,  knew 
the  place ;  because  Jesus  often  there  met  with  his 

3  disciples.  (3)  Then  Judas  received  a  regiment, i' 
and  from  the  presence  of  the  chief  priests  and 
Pharisees  he  had  officials  ;<=  and  he  came  to  the  place 

4  with  lanterns  and  lamps  and  weapons. — (4)  And 
Jesus,  as  he  knew  every  thing  that  was  to  befall 
him,  went  forth  and  said  to  them  :  Whom  seek  ye? 

5  (5)  They  say  to  him :  Jesus  the  Nazarean.  Jesus 
said  to  them :  I  am  he.     And  Judas  the  betrayer 

6  was  also  standing  with  them.  (6)  And  when  Jesus 
said  to  them,  I  am  he,   they  drew  back  and  fell 

7  upon  the  ground.  (7)  And  again  Jesus  asked 
them:  Whom  seek  ye?     And  they  said:  Jesus  the 

8  Nazarean.  (8)  Jesus  said  to  them:  I  have  told 
you  that  I  am  be ;  and  if  ye  seek  me,  let  these  go 

9  away :  (9)  that  the  speech  might  be  fulfilled,  which 
he  uttered:  Of  them,  whom  thou  hast  given  me,  I 

10  have  lost  not  even  one. — (10)  And  Simon  Cephas 
had  upon  him  a  sword ;  and  he  drew  it,  and  smote 
a  servant  of  the  high  priest,  and  cut  off  his  right 
ear.     And    the    servant's    name    was    Malchus.'^ 

11  (11)  And  Jesus  said  to  Cephas:  Put  the  sword 
into  its  sheath.  The  cup  which  my  Father  hath 
given  me,  shall  I  not  drink  it? 

12  Then  the  regiment  and  the  chiliarchs°  and  the 
officials  of  the  Jews  laid  hold  of  Jesus,  and  bound 

13  him ;  (13)  and  they  led  him  first  to  the  presence 
of  Annas  ;f  for  he  was  father-in-law  to  Caiaphas, 

1-1  who  was  the  high  priest  of  that  year.  (14)  And 
it  was  Caiaphas?  who  counselled  the  Jews,  that  it 
was  expedient,  one  man  should  die  for  the  people. 

15  — (15)  And  Simon  Cephas  and  one  other  of  the 
disciples  went  after  Jesus.  And  that  other  disciple 
knew  the  high  priest;  aud  he  entered  with  Jesus 


Sy.  v05rO 


Sy.  ri^ml 

Gr.  (firs7pa, 
Lat.  coliors. 

Sy.  ]Ji_K»5 


^    Sy.  .^AVn 
eSy. 

'  Sy.  ^J_.^ 
f  Sy.  |.£LkID 


20i 


JOHN,    XVIII. 


^  Sy.  hour. 
Lnt.  Prcclo- 


16 


17 


18 


19 


20 


21 
22 


into  the  hall.  (16)  But  Simon  stood  without  at 
the  door;  and  that  other  disciple,  who  knew  the 
high  priest,  Avent  out  and  spoke  to  the  doorkeeper, 
and  brought  in  Simon,  (17)  And  the  maid  who 
kept  the  door,  said  to  Simon:  Art  not  thou  also 
one  of  this  man's  disciples?  And  he  said:  I  am 
not.  (18)  And  the  servants  and  officials  were 
standing,  and  had  placed  a  fire  to  warm  themselves. 

•(19)  And  the  high  priest  interrogated  Jesus  re- 
specting his  disciples,  and  respecting  his  doctrine. 
(20)  And  Jesus  said  to  him :  I  have  discoursed 
openly  with  the  people,  and  have  at  all  times 
taught  in  the  synagogue  and  m  the  temple,  where 
all  the  Jews  assemble ;  and  I  have  uttered  nothing 
in  private.  (21)  Why  dost  thou  interrogate  me? 
Ask  them  who  have  heard,  what  I  said  to  them : 
lo,  they  know  what  I  have  said.  (22)  And  as  he 
said  these  things,  one  of  the  officials  standing  by, 
smote  the  cheek  of  Jesus,  and  said  to  him  :  Givest 
thou  such  an  answer  to  the  high  priest?  (23)  Jesus  23 
replied,  and  said  to  him :  If  I  have  spoken  evil, 
bear  witness  of  that  evil ;  but  if  well,  why  smitest 
thou  me?  (24)  Now  Annas  had  sent  Jesus  bound 
to  Caiaphas  the  high  priest. — (25)  And  Simon 
Cephas  was  standing  and  warming  himself;  and 
they  said  to  him:  Art  not  thou  also  one  of  his  disci- 
ples? And  he  denied,  and  said:  I  am  not.  (26)  And  26 
one  of  the  servants  of  the  high  priest,  a  kinsman 
of  him  whose  ear  Simon  cut  off,  said  to  him :  Did 
I  not  see  thee  with  him  in  the  garden?  (27)  And 
again  Simon  denied:  and  at  that  moment''  the 
cock  crew. 

And  they  led  Jesus  from  the  presence  of  Caia- 
phas unto  the  PnBtorium;'  and  it  was  morning. 
But  they  did  not  enter  the  Prnetorium,  lest  they 
should  defile  themselves  before  they  had  eaten  the 
passover.  (29)  And  Pilate  went  forth  to  them 
without,  and  said  to  them :  What  accusation  have 
ye  against  this  man  ?  (30)  They  replied,  and  said 
to  him  :  If  he  were  not  a  malefactor,  we  should  not 
have  delivered  him  up  to  thee.  (31)  Pilate  said  to 
them:  Take  ye  him,  and  judge  him  according  to 
your  law.  The  Jews  said  to  him:  It  is  not  lawful 
for  us  to  put  a  man  to  death  :  (32)  that  the  speech  32 
of  Jesus  might  be  fulfilled,  when  he  made  known 
by  what  death  he  was  to  die.     (33)  And   Pilate  33 


2-1 
25 


27 


28 


29 
30 


31 


JOHN,    XIX. 

went  into  tlie  Prastorium,   and  called  Jesus,  and 

said   to  him :    Art  thou  the  king   of  the  Jews  ? 

S-i  (34)  Jesus  said  to  him:  Sayest  thou  this  of  thyself, 

35  or  have  others  said  [it]  to  thee  of  me  ?  (35)  Pilate 
said  to  him :  Am  I  a  Jew  ?  Thy  countrymen  and 
the  chief  priests  have  delivered  thee  to  me.     What 

36  hast  thou  done?  (36)  Jesus  said  to  him  :  My  king- 
dom is  not  of  this  world.  If  my  kingdom  were  of 
this  world,  my  servants  would  have  fought,  that  I 
might  not  be  delivered  up  to  the  Jews :  but  now, 

37  my  kingdom  is  not  from  hence.  (37)  Pilate  said 
to  him :  Then  thou  art  a  king?  Jesus  said  to  him : 
Thou  hast  said,  that  I  am  a  king.  For  this  was  I 
born  ;  and  for  this  came  I  into  the  world,  that  I 
might  bear  testimony  to  the  truth.     Every  one  that 

38  is  of  the  truth,  heareth  my  voice.  (38)  Pilate  said 
to  him :  What  is  the  truth  ?  ^  And  as  he  said  this, 
he  went  out  again  to  the  Jews,  and  said  to  them : 

39  I  lind  not  any  crime  in  him.  (39)  And  ye  have  a 
custom  that  I  should  release  one  to  you  at  the  pass- 
over;  will  ye,  therefore,  that  I  release  to  you  this 

40  king  of  the  Jews?  (40)  And  they  all  cried  out, 
and  said:  Not  this  man,  but  Barabbas.i     Now  this 

XIX.  Barabbas  was  a  robber.'" — XIX.   Then   Pilate 

2  scourged  Jesus.  (2)  And  the  soldiers  braided  a 
crown  of  thorns,  and.  put  it  on  his  head  ;  and  they 

3  clothed  him  in  purple  garments :  (3)  and  they  said : 
Iiail,»-  king  of  the  Jews!    and  smote  him  on  his 

4  cheeks,  (4)  And  Pilate  went  out  again,  and  said 
to  them:  Lo,  I  bring  him  out  to  you,  that  ye  may 
know  that  I  find  against  him  no  offence  whatever. 

5  (5)  And  Jesus  went  forth,  having  on  him  the 
crown  of  thorns,  and  the  purple  garments.     And 

6  Pilate  said  to  them :  Behold,  the  man !  (6)  And 
when  the  chief  priests  and  officials  saw  him,  they 
cried  out,  and  said:  llangb  him;  hang  him. 
Pilate  said  to  them:  Take  ye  him,  and  crucify <= 

7  him ;  for  I  find  no  offence  in  him,  (7)  The  Jews 
say  to  him :  We  have  a  law,  and,  according  to  our 
law,  he  deserveth  death,  because  he  made  himself 

8  the  Son  of  God,     (8)  And  when  Pilate  heard  that 

9  declaration,  he  feared  the  more.  (9)  And  he  went 
again  into  the  Preetorium ;  and  he  said  to  Jesus : 
Whence  art  thou  ?     And  Jesus  gave  him  no  an- 

10  swer.  (10)  Pilate  said  to  him:  Wilt  thou  not 
speak  to  me  ?     Knowest  thou  not,  that  I  have  au- 


205 


'  Sy. 
1'^ 


CLliD 


'  Sy.  ]££L 


Sy.  Peace  to 
thee. 


.Sy. 

aOI  1  'no  \  » 
_  0) 

=  Sy. 
aC71Q.2LO0l 


206 


^  Sy.  4^. 


Gaphiphtlui. 


(  Sy. 

E  Sy.  w£}ar)il 


Sy 


^^ 


=  Gazullha. 


Sy.  Zul^f^v. 
ZUJLDOOIJO 


Sy. 

CTLi_iZ.ao 


JOHN,    XIX. 

thorit}^  ^  to  release  thee,  and  have  authority  to  cru- 
cify thee?     (11)  Jesus  said  to  him:  Thou  wouldst  11 
have  no  authority  at  all  over  me,  if  it  were  not 
given  to  thee  from  on  high :  therefore  his  sin  who 
delivered   me  up  to  thee,  is  greater  tlian  thine. 
(12)  And  for  this  reason,  Pilate  was  disposed  to  12 
release   hira.     But   the  Jews   cried   out :  If  thou 
release  this  man,  thou  art  not  Caesar's  friend :  for 
whoever  maketh  himself  a  king,  is  the  adversary 
of  Cassar.     (13)  And  w^hen  Pilate  heard  this  dec-  13 
laration,  he  brought  Jesus  forth,  and  sat  upon  the 
tribunal,  in  a  place  called  the  pavement  of  stones; 
but  in  Hebrew  it  is  called  Gabbatha.°     (14)  And  11 
it  was  the  preparation  for  the  passover  ;  and  it  was 
about  the  sixth  hour.     And  he  said  to  the  Jews : 
Behold,   your  king.      (15)   But  they   cried   out:  15 
Away  with   him,    away   with   him;    hangf  hira, 
hang  him.     Pilate  said  to  them:  Shall  I  crucify? 
your  king?     The  chief  priests  said  to  him:  We 
have  no  king,  but  Ciesar.     (16)  Then  he  delivered  16 
him  to  them,  that  they  might  crucify  him. 

And  they  took  Jesus,  and  led  him  away,  (17)  17 
bearing  his  cross,  to  a  place  called  a  Skull,  and  in 
Hebrew  called  Grolgotha ;  '^   (18)  where  they  cru-  18 
cified  him ;  and  two  others  with  him,  the  one  on 
this  side,  and  the  other  on  that,  and  Jesus  in  the 
middle.     (19)  And  Pilate  also  wrote  a  tablet,  and  19 
affixed  it  to  his  cross.     And  thus  it  was  written : 
This  is  Jesus  the  Nazarean,  king  of  the  Jews. 
(20)  And  many  of  the  Jews  read  this  label;  be-  20 
cause  the  place  where  Jesus  was  crucified,  was 
near  to  Jerusalem  ;  and  it  was  written  in  Hebrew 
and  Greek  and  Latin.'     (21)  And  the  chief  priests  21 
said  to  Pilate :  Write  not  that  he  is  king  of  the 
Jews,  but  that  he  said  I  am  king  of  the  Jews. 
(22)  Pilate   said:    What  I  have  written,  I  have  22 
■written. — (23)  And  the  soldiers,  -when  they  had  23 
crucified  Jesus,  took  his  garments  and  made  four 
parcels  of  them,  a  parcel  for  each  of  the  soldiers. 
And  his  tunic  ^  was  without  seam  from  the  top, 
woven   throughout,     (24)   And   they  said  one  to  24 
another :  We  will  not  rend  it,  but  will  cast  the  lot 
upon  it,  whose  it  shall  be.     And  the  scripture  was 
fulfilled,  which  said:  They  divided  my  garments 
among  them ;  and  upon  my  vesture  they  cast  the 
lot.      These   things   did  the   soldiers. — (25)   And  25 


JOHN,    XIX. 


207 


there  were  standing  near  the  cross  of  Jesus,  his 
mother,   and  his  mother's  sister,  and  Mary   [the 

26  wife]  of  Cleophas,  and  Mary  Magdalena.  (26)  And 
Jesus  saw  his  mother,  and  that  disciple  whom  he 
loved,  standing  bj,   and  he  said  to  his  mother : 

27  Woman,  behold,  thy  son.  (27)  And  he  said  to 
that  disciple :  Behold,  thy  mother.  And  from 
that  hour,  the  disciple  took  her  near  himself. — 

28  (28)  After  these  things,  Jesus  knew  that  every 
thing  was  finished ;  and,  that  the  scripture  might 

29  be  fulfilled,  he  said :  I  thirst.  (29)  And  a  vessel 
was  standing  there,  full  of  vinegar.  And  they 
filled  a  sponge  with  the  vinegar,  and  put  it  on  a 

30  hyssop  [stalk],  and  bore  it  to  his  mouth.  (30) 
And  when  Jesus  had  received  the  vinegar,  he 
said:  Lo;  Done.  And  he  bowed  his  head,  and 
yielded  up  his  spirit.^ 

31  And  because  it  was  the  preparation,™  the  Jews 
said :  These  bodies  must  not  remain  all  night  upon 
the  cross :  because  the  sabbath  was  dawning ; "  and 
the  day  of  that  sabbath  was  a  great  day.  And 
they  requested  of  Pilate,  that  they  should  break 
the  legs  of  those  crucified,  and  take  them  down. 

82  (32)  And  the  soldiers  came,  and  broke  the  legs  of 
the  first,  and  of  the  other  that  was  crucified  with 

33  him.  (33)  But  when  they  came  to  Jesus,  they 
saw  that  he  was  already  dead ;  and  they  broke  not 

3-i  his  legs.  (34)  But  one  of  the  soldiers  thrust  a 
spear  into  his  side  ;  and  immediately  there  issued 

So  out  blood  and  water. — (35)  And  he  who  saw  [it], 
hath  testified :  and  his  testimony  is  true :  and  he 
knoweth,  that  he  speaketh  the  truth,  that  ye  also 

36  may  believe.  (36)  For  these  things  occurred,  that 
the  scripture  might  be  fulfilled,  which   said:  A 

37  bone  of  him  shall  not  be  broken,  (37)  And  again 
another  scripture,  which  saith :  They  will  look  on 
him,  whom  they  pierced. 

38  After  these  things,  Joseph  of  Kamath,  (lor  he  was 
a  disciple  of  Jesus,  and  kept  concealed  through 
fear  of  the  Jews,)  requested  of  Pilate,  that  he  might 
take  away  the  body  of  Jesus.  And  Pilate  permit- 
ted.    And  he   came,    and   bore   away  the  body 

39  of  Jesus.  (39)  And  there  came  also  Nicodemus, 
(he  who  previously  came  to  Jesus  by  night,)  and 
he  brought  with  him  a  compound  of  myrrh  and 


OT_kjO> 


'  i.  e.  Friday. 
or,  comin'T  on. 


Sy.  _.;4A 


40  aloes,  about  a  hundred  pounds."     (40)  And  they{=  Gr.  Xlrpai. 


208 


JOHN,    XX. 


Sy.  known. 


bore  away  the  body  of  Jesus,  and  wound  it  in 
linens  and  aromatics,  as  it  is  the  custom  of  the 
Jews  to  bury.  (41)  And  there  was  a  garden  in  41 
the  place  where  Jesus  was  crucified,  and  in  the 
garden  a  new  sepulchre  in  which  no  person  had 
ever  been  laid.  (42)  And  there  they  laid  Jesus,  42 
because  the  sabbath  had  commenced,  and  because 
the  sepulchre  was  near. 

And  the  first  day  of  the  week,  in  the  morning,  XX. 
while  it  was  yet  dark,  Mary  Magdalena  came  to  tlie 
sepulchre :  and  she  saw  that  the  stone  was  removed 
from  the  grave.     (2)  And  she  ran,  and  came  to     2 
Simon  Cephas,  and  to  that  other  disciple  whom 
Jesus  loved,  and  said  to  them :  They  have  taken 
away  our  Lord  from  the  sepulchre,  and  I  know  not 
where  they  have  laid  him.     (3)  And  Simon  set     3 
out,  and  the  other  disciple,  and  they  were  going  to 
the.  sepulchre.     (4)  And  they  both  ran  together;     4 
but  that  disciple  outran  Simon,  and  came  first  to 
the  sepulchre.     (5)  And  he  looked  in,  and  saw  the     5 
linen  cloths  lying :  but  he  did  not  go  in.     (6)  And     6 
after  him  came  Simon ;  and  he  entered  the  sepul- 
chre, and  saw  the  linen  cloths  lying ;  (7)  and  the     7 
napkin,  that  had  been  wrapped  about  his  head,  was 
not  with  the  linen  cloths,  but  was  folded  up,  and 
laid  in  a  place  by  itself     (8)  Then  entered  also  the     8 
disciple  who  came  first  to  the  sepulchre ;  and  he 
saw,   and  believed.      (9)    For   they  had   not  yet     9 
learned^  from  the  scriptures,  that  he  was  to  arise 
from   the   dead.      (10)   And  those  disciples  went  10 
away  again   to   their  place. — (11)   But  Mary  re-  11 
mained  standing  at  the  sepulchre,  and  weeping; 
and  as  she  wept,  she  looked  into  the  sepulchre, 
(12)  and  saw  two  angels  in  white,  who  were  sitting,  12 
one  at  the  pillows  and  one  at  the  feet,  Avhere  the 
body  of  Jesus  was  laid.     (13)   And  they  said  to  13 
her :    Woman,  why  weepest  thou  ?      She  said  to 
them:    Because  they  have  taken  away  my  Lord, 
and    I   know    not   where    they   have    laid    him.    . 

(14)  Having  said  this,  she  turned  round,  and  saw  14 
Jesus  standing,  but  did  not  know  that  it  was  Jesus. 

(15)  Jesus  said  to  her :  Woman,  why  weepest  thou?  15 
and,  whom  dost  thou  seek?     And  she  supposed 
that  he  was  the  gardener:  and  she  said  to  him: 
My  lord,  if  thou  hast  borne  him  away,  tell  me 


JOHN,    XX. 


209 


19 


20 


where  thou  hast  laid  him,  [and]  I  will  go  and  take 

16  him  away.  (16)  Jesus  said  to  her:  Mary!  And 
she  turned,  and  said  to  him  in  Hebrew :  Rabbuni  ;^ 

17  which  is  interpreted  Teacher.''  (17)  Jesus  said  to 
her :  Touch  me  not ;  for  not  yet  have  I  ascended 
to  my  Father.  But  go  to  my  brethren,  and  say  to 
them :  I  ascend  to  my  Father  and  your  Father,  and 

18  to  my  God  and  your  God.  (18)  Then  came  Mary 
Magdalena,  and  told  the  disciples  that  she  had  seen 
our  Lord  ;  and  that  he  had  said  these  things  to  her. 

And  on  the  evening  of  that  first  day  of  the  week, 
the  doors  being  shut  where  the  disciples  were,  for 
fear  of  the  Jews,  Jesus  came,  and  stood  in  the  midst 
of  them,  and  said  to  them :  Peace  be  with  jouA 
(20)  Having  said  this,  he  showed  them  his  hands 
and   his  side.      And  the  disciples  rejoiced,  when 

21  they  saw  our  Lord.,  (21)  And  Jesus  said  to  them : 
Peace  be  with  you.     As  my  Father  hath  sent  me, 

22  I  also  send  you.  (22)  And  as  he  said  these  things, 
he  breathed  on  them,  and  said  to  them :  Receive  ye 

23  the  Holy  Spirit.  (23)  If  ye  shall  remit"  sins  to  any 
one,  they  will  be  remitted  to  him ;  and  if  ye  shall 
retain^  [those]  of  any  one,  they  will  be  retained. 

But  Thomas,  who  was  called  the  Twin,?  one  of 
the  twelve,  was  not  there  with  them,  when  Jesus 
came.  (25)  And  the  disciples  said  to  him :  We 
have  seen  our  Lord.  But  he  said  to  them :  Unless 
I  see  in  his  hands  the  places  of  the  nails,  and  put 
my  fingers  into  them,  and  extend  my  hand  to  his 
side,  I  wnll  not  believe. — (26)  And  after  eight  days, 
the  disciples  were  again  within,  and  Thomas  with 
them :  and  Jesus  came,  while  the  doors  were  closed, 
stood  in  the  midst,  and  said  to  them:  Peace  be 
with  you.  (27)  And  he  said  to  Thomas :  Reach 
hither  thy  finger,  and  look  at  my  hands  ;  and  reach 
out  thy  hand  and  extend  it  to  my  side :  and  be  not 
28  incredulous,  but  believing.  (28)  And  Thomas 
answered,  and  said  to  him:  My  Lord,  and  my 
God  '.h  (29)  Jesus  said  to  him :  Now,  when  thou 
hast  seen  me,  thou  believest :  blessed  are  they,  who 
have  not  seen  me,  yet  believe. — (30)  And  many 
other  signs  did  Jesus  before  his  disciples,  which  are 
not  written  in  this  book.  (31)  But  these  are  writ- 
ten, that  ye  may  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Messiah, 
the  Son  of  God ;  and  that  when  ye  believe,  ye  may 
have  life  eternal  by  his  name. 


24 


25 


26 


27 


29 


30 
31 


Sy.  .1 10  n5 


J  Sy    "jVoV 


V^^^^ 


«  Sy. 

f  Sy.  ^r*AL 

'  Sy.  MZ 


Sy.  ^jlD 


Sy.  ]l4.0 


■Sy.]2^ 


After  these  things,  Jesus  showed  himself  again  XXI. 
to  his  disciples,   at  the  sea  of  Tiberias :    and  he 
showed  himself  thus:    (2)    There  were  together,     2 
Simon  Cephas,  and  Thomas  called  the  Twin,  and 
Xathanicl  who  was  of  Cana^^  in  Galilee,  and  the 
sons  of  Zebedee,  and  two  other  of  the  disciples. 
(3)  Simon  Cephas  said  to  them:  I  will  go  [and]     3 
catch  fishes.     They  said  to  him :  We  will  go  with 
thee.     And  they  went,  and  embarked  in  a  ship : 
and   that  night,  they  caught  nothing,      {■i)   And     4 
when  it  was  morning,  Jesus  stood  on  the  shore  of 
the  sea :  and  the  disciples  did  not  know  that  it  was 
Jesus.     (5)  And  Jesus  said  to  them:  Lads,^  have    5 
ye   any  thing  to  eat?      They  say  to   him:    No. 
(6)  He  said  to  them :  Cast  your  net  on  the  right     6 
side  of  the  ship,  and  ye  will  find  them.     And  they 
cast;  and  the}*  could  not  draw  up  the  net,  because 
of  the  multitude  of  fishes  it  contained.     (7)  And     7 
that  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved,  said  to  Cephas: 
That  is  our  Lord.      And  Simon,  when  he  heard 
that  it  was  our  Lord,  took  his  tunic,  and  girded  his 
loins,  (for  he  had  been  naked,)  and  threw  himself 
into  the  sea,  to  go  to  Jesus.     (8)   But  the  other     8 
disciples  came  in  the  ship,  (for  they  were  not  very 
fur  from  the  land,  only  about  two  hundred  cubits,) 
and  they  dragged  the  net  with  the  fishes     (9)  And     9 
when   they  came   upon  the  land,  thay  saw, coals 
placed,  and  fish  laid  on  them,  and  bread.    (10)  And  10 
Jesus  said  to  them :    Bring  [some]  of  the  fishes, 
which   ye   have   just   caught.      (11)    And  Simon  11 
Cephas  embarked,  and  drew  the  net  to  land,  full  of 
huge  fishes,  one  hundred  and  fifty  and  three.    And 
with  all  this  weight,  the  net  was  not  rent. — (12)  And  12 
Jesus  said  to  them:  Come  and  dine.     And  no  one 
of  the  disciples  presumed  to  ask  him,  who  he  was  ; 
for  they  knew  that  it  was  our  Lord.     (13)  And  13 
Jesus  came,  and  took  bread  and  fishes,  and  gave  to 
his    disciples.      (14)    This   is  the  third  time  that  14 
Jesus  appeared  to  his  disciples  when  he  had  arisen 
from  the  dead. 

And  when  they  had  dined,  Jesus  said  to  Simon  15 
Cephas:  Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  lovest  thou  me,  more 
than  these  do  ?     He  said  to  him :  Yes,  my  Lord : 
thou  knowest  that  I  love  the6.    Jesus  said  to  him  : 
Feed  my  lambs  for  me.     (16)  Again,  he  said  to  IG 
him  the  second  time :  Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  lovest 


JOHN,    XXI. 


211 


thou  me  ?     He  said  to  liim :  Yes,  mj  Lord  ;  tliou 
knowest  that  I  love  thee.    Jesus  said  to  him  :*Feed 

17  my  sheep  for  me.  (17)  Again,  Jesus  said  to  him 
the  third  time :  Simon,  sou  of  Jonas,  lovest  thou 
me  ?  And  it  grieved  Cephas,  that  he  said  to  him 
the  third  time,  Lovest  thou  me ;  and  he  said  to 
him:  My  Lord,  thou  understandest^  all  things, 
thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee.     Jesus  said  to  him : 

18  Feed  my  sheep  for  me.  (18)  Verily,  veril}^,  I  say  to 
thee :  When  thou  wast  young,  thou  girdedst  thy 
own  loins,  and  walkedst  whither  it  pleased  thee : 
but  Avhen  thou  shalt  be  old,  thou  wilt  extend  thy 
hands,  and  another  will  gird  thy  loins  for  thee,  and 
wdll    conduct    thee    whither    thou   wouldst    not. 

19  (19)  And  this  he  said,  to  show  by  what  death  he 
was  to  glorify  God.     And  having  said  these  things, 

20  he  said  to  him:  Follow  me. — (20)  "And  Simon 
turned  himself,  and  saw  coming  after  him,  that 
disciple  whom  Jesus  loved,  who  fell  on  the  breast 
of  Jesus  at  the  supper,  and  said,  i\Iy  Lord,  who  is 

21  it  will  betray  thee?  (21)  llim  Cephas  saw,  and 
said  to  Jesus:  My  Lord,  as  for  this  man,  what? 

22  (22)  Jesus  said  to  him :  If  I  will,  that  he  abide 
here  until  I  Come,  what  [is  that]  to  thee  ?     Follow 

23  thou  me.  (23)  And  this  saying  went  forth  among 
the  brethren,  that  this  disciple  would  not  die. 
Yet  Jesus  did  not  say,  that  he  would  not  die ;  but. 
If  I  will  that  he  abide  here  until  I  come,  what  [is 
that]  to  thee. 

21  This  is  the  disciple  who  hath  testified  of  all 
these  things,  and  hath  written  them :  and  we  know, 

25  that  his  testimonyis  true. — (25)  And  there  are  also 
many  other  things,  which  Jesus  did;  which,  if 
written  out  with  particularity, •i  the  world  itself,  as 
I  suppose,  would  not  suffice  for  the  books  that 
would  be  written. 


Completion  of  the  Holy  Gospel,  the  announcement  of  John 
the  Evangelist ;  which  he  uttered,  in  Greek,  at  Ephesus. 


Sy.  :>q::ijo 


^  Sy.  one  hij  one. 


The  Book  of  Acts;  tlmt  is,  Narratives  of  the  Blessed  Legates: 

Compiled  by  Saint  Liilvp,  llie  Evangelist. 


The  former  book  have  I  written,  O  Theophilus, 
concerning  all  the  things  which  our  Lord  Jesus 
Messiah  began  to  do  and  teach,  (2)  until  the  day 
when  he  was  taken  up,  after  he  had  instructed 
those  legates^i  whom  he  had  chosen  by  the  Holy 
Spirit.  (3)  To  whom  also  he  showed  himself  alive 
after  he  had  suffered,  by  numerous  signs,  during 
forty  days,  while  he  was  seen  by  them,  and  spoke 
of  the  kingdom  of  God.  (4)  And  when  he  had 
eaten  bread  with  them,  he  instructed  them  not  to 
depart  from  Jerusalem,  but  to  wait  for  the  promise 
of  the  Father,  which  (said  he)  ye  have  heard  from 
me.  (5)  For  John  baptized  with  water;  but  ye 
will  be  baptized  with  the  Iloly  Spirit  after  not 
many  days. — (6)  And  thc}^,  when  assembled,  asked 
him  and  said  to  him :  Our  Lord,  wilt  thou  at  this 
time  restore  the  kingdom  to  Israel?  (7)  He  said 
to  them :  It  is  not  yours,  to  know  the  time  or  times 
which  God  hath  placed  in  his  own  power.  (8)  But 
when  the  Holy  Spirit  shall  come  upon  you,  ye  will 
receive  energy,*'  and  will  be  witnesses  for  me  in 
Jerusalem,  and  in  all  Judaa,  and  also  among  the 
Samaritans,  and  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth. — 
(9)  And  when  he  had  said  these  things,  while  they 
beheld  him,  he  was  taken  up,  and  a  cloud  received 
him,  and  he  was  hidden  from  their  eyes.  (10)  And 
while  they  were  looking  toward  heaven,  as  he  de- 
parted, two  men  were  found  standing  near  them, 
in  white  garments,  (11)  and  saying  to  them:  Ye 
Galilean  men,  why  stand  ye  and  look  toward 
heaven?  This  Jesus,  who  is  taken  up  from  you 
to  heaven,  will  so  come,  as  ye  have  seen  him  as- 
cend to  heaven. 


10 


11 


ACTS,    I. 


213 


12  And  afterwards  they  returned  to  Jerusalem  from 
the  mount  called  the  place  of  Olives,  which  was 
near  to  Jerusalem,  and  distant  from  it  about  seven*^ 

13  furlongs.  (13)  And  when  they  had  entered,  they 
went  to  an  upper  chamber ;  where  were  Peter,  and 
John,  and  James,  and  Andrew,  and  Philip,  and 
Thomas,  and  Matthew,  and  Bartholomew,  and 
James  the  son  of  Alpheus,   and  Simon  Zelotes,'^ 

14  and  Judas  the  son  of  James.  (14)  All  these  uni- 
tedly persevered  in  praj^er,  with  one  soul,^  together 
with  the  women,  and  with  Mary  the  mother  of 

15  Jesus,  and  with  his  brothers.- — (15)  And  in  those 
days  stood  up  Simon  Cephas  in  the  midst  of  the 
disciples,  (the  persons  there  assembled  being  about 

16  one  hundred  and  twenty,)  and  said:  (16)  Men, 
brethren,  it  was  righf  that  the  scripture  should 
be  fulfilled,  which  the  Holy  Spirit  spake,  by  the 
mouth  of  David,  concerning  Judas  who  was  guide 

17  to  them  that  apprehended  Jesus.  (17)  For  he  was 
numbered  with  us,  and  had  a  parts  in  this  ministry. 

18  (18)  He  purchased  a  field  with  the  wages  of  sin ; 
and  he  fell  upon  his  face  on  the  ground,  and  burst 
in  the  middle,  and  all  his  entrails  were  poured  out. 

19  (19)  And  this  was  known  to  all  that  dwelt  at  Jeru- 
salem ;  so  that  the  field  was  called,  in  the  language 
of  the  country,   Aceldama, ^  which   is  interpreted 

20  Field  of  Blood.  (20)  For  it  is  written,  in  the  book 
of  Psalms:  Let  his  habitation  be  desolate,  and 
let  no  resident  be  in  it;  and  let  another  take  his 

21  service.!  (21)  It  should  therefore  be,  that  one  of 
these  persons,  who  have  been  with  us  all  the  time 
that  our  Lord  Jesus  went   in   and  out  with  us, 

22  (22)  commencing  from  the  baptism  of  John,  unto 
the  day  he  was  taken  up  from  us, — should    be, 

23  with  us,  a  witness  of  his  resurrection.  (23)  And 
they  proposed  two,  Joseph  called  Barsabas,  whose 

24  surname  was  Justus,  and  Matthias.  (24)  And  when 
they  had  prayed,  they  said :  Thou,  Lord,  knowest 
what  is  in  the  hearts  of  all,  manifest  which  thou 

25  hast  chosen  of  these  two,  (25)  that  he  should  take 
partk  in  this  ministry  and  legateship,!  from  which 
Judas  broke  away,  that  he  might  go  to  his  own 

26  place.  (26)  And  they  cast  lots,  and  it  came  upon 
Matthias ;  and  he  was  numbered  with  the  eleven 
legates.™ 


Gr.  a  sahhath 
day's  journey. 


Sy.  .  n  g^l 


f  Sy.  ^i] 


e  or,  lot. 


h  Sy. 


Sy. 


or,  lot. 

or,  aposilcship. 


or,  Apostles. 


Sy.  U» 


05 


OT,Jii-e. 
Sy.  "UjO? 


^  Gr.  Mesopota- 


Sy.  "jjOj.^ 


f  or,  middle  nf 
the  forenoon. 


P  or,  Elders. 


And  when  the  days  of  pentecost  were  fully  come 
while  they  were  all  assembled  together,  (2)   sud-     2 
denly  there  was  a  sound   from  heaven,   as  of  a 
violent  wind;!^  and  the  whole  house  where  they 
were  sitting  was  filled  with  it.     (3)  And  there  ap-     3 
peared  to  them  tongues,  which  were  divided  like 
ilame;^  and  they  rested  upon  each  of  them.     (4)     4 
And  they  were  all  filled  Avith  the  Holy  Spirit,c  and 
began  to  speak  in  diverse  languages,  as  the  Spirit 
gave  them  to  speak.     (5)  Now  there  were  resident     5 
at  Jerusalem  persons  who  feared  God,  Jews  from 
all  the  nations  under  heaven.     (6)   And  when  that     6 
sound  occurred,  all  the  people  collected  together ; 
and  they  were  agitated,  because  they  every  one 
heard  them  speaking  in  their  own  languages.     (7)     7 
And    tliey   were    all    astonished,    and  wondered, 
saying  one   to   another:     All    these    who   speak, 
behold,   are  they   not  Galileans?     (8)  And   how     8 
do  we  hear,  each  his  own  lano-uage,  in  which  we 
were  born  ?     (9)  Parthians,  and  Medes,  and  Elam-     9 
ites,  and  those  dwelling  between  the  rivers, '•  Jews 
and  Cappadocians,  and  those  from  the  region  of 
Pontus   and  of  Asia,    (10)    and   those  from'  the  10 
region  of  Phrygia,  and  of  Pamphylia,  and  of  Egypt, 
and  of  the  parts  of  Lybia  near  Gyrene,  and  those 
who  have  come  from  Kome,  Jews  and  prosel^'tes;^ 
(11)  and   those   from    Crete,    and    Arabians. — Lo,  11 
we   hear  them  speak  in  our  own  languages  the 
wonders  of  God.     (12)  And  they  all  wondered  and  12 
were   astonished,    saying   one   to   another:    From 
whom  is  this  thing?     (13)  Others  however  ridi-  13 
culed  them,  saying :  They  have  drunken  new  wine, 
and  are  intoxicated. 

And  afterwards  Simon  Cephas  rose  up,  with  the  14 
eleven  legates,  and  elevated  his  voice,  and  said  to 
them :  Men,  Jews,  and  all  ye  that  reside  at  Jerusa- 
lem ;  be  this  known  to  you,  and  hearken  ye  to  my     - 
words.     (15)  For  these  are  not  intoxicated,  as  ye  15 


suppose :  for 
(IG)  But  this  is 
prophet:  (17)  It 
God,  that  I  will 


it   is  yet  but  the  third  hour.^' 
what  was   spoken   by  Joel   the  16 
shall  be  in  the  last  days,  saith  17 
pour  my  Spirit  upon  all  flesh : 
I  and  your  sons  shall  prophesy,  and  your  daughters; 
;and  your  young  men  shall  see  visions,  and  your 
joldsf   men  shall  dream  dreams.     (18)    And   upon  18 
Imy  servants  and  my  handmaids  will  I  pour  my 


ACTS,    II. 


215 


Spirit,  in   those   days,   and   they  shall  prophesy, 

19  (19)  And  I  will  give  signs  in  heaven,  and  prodi- 
giesii  on  earth,  blood,  and  fire,  and  vapor  of  smoke. 

20  (20)  And  the  sun  shall  be  turned  into  darkness, 
and  the  moon  into  blood,  before  that  great  and 

21  fearful  day  of  the  Lord  come.  (21)  And  it  shall  be, 
that  whoever  will  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord, 

22  shall  live.i  (22)  Men,  sons  of  Israel,  hear  ye  these 
words :  Jesus  the  Nazarean,  a  man  made  manifest 
among  you  by  God,  by  those  deeds  of  power  and 
prodigies  which  God  Avrought  among  yon  by  his 

23  hand,  as  ye  yourselves  know ;  (23)  him,  being 
hereto  appointedi^  by  the  prescience  and  the  good 
pleasure  of  God, — ye  have  delivered  into  the  hands 
of  the   wicked;    and   have    crucified    and    slain. 

24  (24)  But  God  hath  resuscitated  him,  and  hath  loosed 
the  cords^  of  the  grave ;    because  it  could  not  be, 

25  that  he  should  be  held  in  the  grave.""  (25)  For 
David  said  of  him:  I  foresaAV  my  Lord  at  all 
times  J  for  he  is  on  my  right  hand,  so  that  I  shall 

26  not  be  moved.  (26)  Therefore  my  heart  doth  re- 
joice, and  my  glory  exult,  and  also  my  body  shall 

27  abide  in  hope.  (27)  For  thou  wilt  not  leave  my 
soul  in  the  grave,  nor  wilt  thou  give  thy  pious  one 

28  to  see  corruption.  (28)  Thou  hast  revealed  to  me 
the  path  of  life ;    thou  wilt  fill  me  with  joy  with 

29  thy  presence.  (29)  Men,  brethren,  I  may  speak  to 
you  explicitly  of  the  patriarch  David,  that  he  died, 
and  also  was  buried;    and  his  sepulchre  is  with 

30  us  to  this  day.  (30)  For  he  was  a  prophet,  and  he 
knew,  that  God  had  sworn  to  him  by  an  oath : 
Of  the  fruit  of  thy  bowels,  I  will  seat  [one]  on  thy 

31  throne.  (31)  And  he  foresaw,  and  spoke  of  the 
resurrection  of  Messiah,  that  he  was  not  left  in 
the   grave,   neither  did  his   body  see   corruption. 

32  (32)  This  Jesus  hath  God  resuscitated ;  and  we  all 

33  are  his  witnesses.  (33)  And  he  it  is,  who  is  ex- 
alted by  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  hath  received 
from  the  Father  a  promise  respecting  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  hath  sent  this  gift  which^  lo,  ye  see  and 

34  hear.  (34)  For  David  hath  not  ascended  into 
heaven ;  because  he  himself  said  :  The  Lord  said  to 

85  my  Lord,  seat  thyself  at  my  right  hand,  (35)  until 
I  shall  place  thy  enemies  a  footstool  to  thy  feet. 

86  (36)  Therefore,  let  all  the  house  of  Israel  know, 


Sy. 


\ 


or,  be  saved. 


^  Sy.  separated. 


or,  pan^s. 
>  Sy.^0  i  fi  D 


216 


ACTS,   III. 


or,  he  saved. 


"  or,  persons, 
f  or,  Apostles. 

=  Gr.  sup^a- 
pi(f  T  la. 


assuredly,  that  God  hath  made  that  Jesus  whom  ye 
crucified,  to  be  Lord  and  Messiah. 

And  wiien  they  heard  these  things,  they  were  agi-  37 
tated  in  their  heart;   and  they  said  to  Simon  and  to 
the  rest  of  the  legates  :  Brethren,  what  shall  we  do  ? 
(88)  Simon  said  to  them :    Repent,   and  be   bap-  38 
tized  every  one  of  you,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  for  the  remission  of  sins;    so  that  ye  may 
receive  the  gift  of  the  Iloly  Spirit.     (39)  For  the  39 
promise  is  to  you,  and  to  your  children,  and  to  all 
those  afar  oft'  whom  God  will  call.     (40)  And  in  40 
many  other  words  he  testified  to  them,  and  en- 
treated of  them,  saying:   Live  ye"  from  this  per- 
verse generation. — (41)  And  some  of  them  readily  41 
received   his   discourse,    and   believed,    and   were 
baptized.     And  there  were  added,   on  that  day, 
about  three  thousand  souls."     (42)  And  they  per-  42 
severed  in  the  doctrine  of  the  legates;?  and  were 
associateci  together  in  prayer,  and  in  breaking  the 
eucharist.r — (43)    And  fear  was  on  every  mind :  43 
and  many  signs  and  prodigies  were  [wrought]  by 
the  hand  of  the  legates  in  Jerusalem.     (44)  And  44 
all  they  who  believed,  were  together;    and  what- 
ever belonged  to    them,  was  of  the   community. 
(45)  And  they  who  had  a  possession,  sold  it,  and  45 
divided  to  each  one  as  he  had  need.     (46)  And  46 
they  continued  daily  in  the  temple,  with  one  soul : 
and   at   home,  they  broke   bread   and   took  food 
rejoicing,    and   in   the   simplicity   of   their  heart. 
(47)  And  they  praised  God,  and  had  favor  with  all  47 
the  people.     And  our  Lord  added  daily  to  the  as- 
sembly those  who  became  alive. 

And  it  occurred,  as  Simon  Cephas  and  John  III. 
went  together  up  to  the  temple,  at  the  time  of 
prayer,  being  the  ninth  hour,   (2)  that,  lo,  those     2 
accustomed  to  bring  a  man  lame  from  his  mother's 
womb,  brought  him  and  laid  him  at  the  gate  of  the 
temple  called  Beautiful ;  that  he  might  ask  alms 
of  those  going  into  tlie  temple.     (3)    This  man,     3 
when  he  saw  Simon  and  John  going  into  the  tem- 
ple, asked  them  to  give  him  alms.     (4)  And  Simon     4 
and  John  looked  on  him,  and  said  to  him :  Look 
on  us.     (5)  And  he  looked  on  them,  expecting  to     5 
receive  something  from  them.     (6)  Simon  said  to     6 
him :  Gold  and  silver,  I  have  not ;   out  what  I  have, 


ACTS,    III. 


217 


I  give  to  thee;    in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 

7  Messiah,  the  Nazarean,  rise  up  and  walk.  (7)  And 
he  took  him  by  tlie  right  hand,  and  raised  him 
up:  and  forthwith,   his  feet  and  his  heels  recov- 

8  ered  strength.  (8)  And  he  sprang,  stood  up,  and 
walked :  and  he  entered  with  them  into  the  temple, 

9  walking,  and  leaping,  and  praising  God.  (9)  And  all 
the  people  saw  him,  as  he  walked  and  praised  God, 

10  (10)  And  thej  knew  that  he  was  the  beggar,  who 
sat  daily  and  asked  alms,  at  the  gate  called  Beauti- 
ful: and  they  were  filled  Avith  wonder  and  admira- 
tion at  what  had  occurred. 

11  And  as  he  held  fast  to  Simon  and  John,  all  the 
people  admiring  ran  to  them  at  the  portico  called 

12  Solomon's.  (12)  And  when  Simon  saw  [it],  he 
answered  and  said  to  them :  Men,  sons  of  Israel, 
why  do  ye  wonder  at  this  ?  or  why  do  ye  gaze  on 
us,  as  if  by  our  own  power  or  authority  we  had 

13  made  this  man  to  walk  ?  (13)  The  God  of  Abra- 
ham and  of  Isaac  and  of  Jacob,  the  God  of  our 
fathers,  hath  glorified  his  Son  Jesus;  whom  ye 
delivered  up,  and  denied  in  the  presence  of  Pilate, 
when  he  would  have  justified  him  and  set  him  free. 

14  (14)  But  ye  denied  the  holy  and  just  One,  and  de- 
manded that  a  murderer  should  be  released  to  you. 

15  (15)  And  that  Prince  of  life^  ye  slew;  and  him, 
hath  God  raised  from  the  dead,  and  all  of  us  are 

16  witnesses  of  it.^  (16)  And,  by  the  faith  in  his 
name,  he  hath  strengthened  and  cured  this  man, 
whom  ye  see  and  know  ;  and  faith  in  him  hath 
given    the   man   this   soundness    before    you    all. 

17  (17)  And  now,  my  brethren,  I  know  that  through 
misapprehensions  ye   did  this,   as   did  also   your 

18  chiefs :"  (18)  and  God,  according  as  he  had  pre- 
viously announced  by  the  mouth  of  all  the  prophets 
that  the  Messiah  would  sufter,  hath  in  this  manner 

19  falfilled  [it].  (19)  Repent,  therefore,  and  be  con- 
verted;   that   so   your  sins  may  be  blotted  out, 

20  (20)  and  times  of  rest  may  come  to  you  from  before 
the  face  of  the  Lord ;  and  he  may  send  to  you  him, 
who  was  made  ready  for  you,  Jesus  the  Messiah  : 

21  (21)  whom  the  heavens  must  retain,<i  until  the 
completion  of  the  times  of  those  things,  which  God 
hath  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  his  holy  prophets  of 

22  old.  (22)  For  Moses  said :  A  prophet,  like  me, 
will  the  Lord  raise  up  to  you,  from  among  your 


Sy. 

(jL.K>)    I  a  .>5 

or,  his  wit- 
nesses. 


Sv. 


<^ 


L.i_a_>) 


<"  or,  receive. 


218 


ACTS,    IV. 


"  or,  person. 
'  Sy.  ^^]l 


^Sy.)jOZ\_i5=: 


Sy.  "ijODJ] 


Sy.  ^\j_»^ 
Sy.  lioiDJl 


^  or,  redemption. 
*  or,  te  saved. 


brethren ;  to  liim  hearken  ye,  in  all  that  he  shall 
say  to  you.     (23)  And  it  will  be,  that  every  soule  23 
who  will  not  hearken  to  that  prophet,  that  soul 
shall  perishf  from  his  people.     (24)  And  all  the  2-i 
proj^hcts  that  have  been,  from  Samuel  and  those 
after  him,  have  spoken  and  proclaimed  of  these 
days.     (25)  Ye  are  the  children  of  the  prophets :  25 
and   that   covenants  which  God   made    with  our 
fathers, — when  he  said  to  Abraham,  that  in  thy  seed 
sliall  all  the  families  of  the  earth  be  blessed, — 
(26)  he  hath  first  established  to  you :   and  God  26 
hath  sent  his  Son  to  bless  you,  if  ye  will  be  con- 
verted, and  repent  of  your  wickedness. 

And  while  they  were  speaking  these  words  to  lY. 
the  people,  the  priests  and  the  Sadducees  and  the 
rulers  ^  of  the  temple  rose  up   against  them ;  (2)     2 
being  angry  with  them,  that  they  taught  the  peo- 
ple, and  preached  a  resurrection  from  the  dead  by 
the  Messiah.     (3)  And  they  laid  hands  on  them,     3 
and  kept  them  until  the  next  day ;  because  even- 
ing was  drawing  near,     (-i)  And  many  who  had     4 
heard  the  word,  believed ;  and  they  were,  in  num- 
ber, about  five  thousand  men. — (5)  And  the  next     5 
day,  the  rulers   and  the   Elders  and  the  Scribes 
assembled ;    (6)  and  also  Annas  the  high  priest,     6 
and  Caiaphas,  and  John,  and  Alexander,  and  they 
who   were   of  the   kindred   of  the   high   priests. 
(7)  And  when  they  had  set   them  in  the  midst,     7 
they    interrogated   them:     By   what  power ^    or 
what  name,  have  ye  done  this  ? — (8)  Then  Simon     8 
Cephas  was  filled  Avith  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  said  to 
them :  Ye  rulers  <=  of  the  people,  and  Elders  of  the 
house  of  Israel,  hear  ye.     (9)  If  we  are  judged  by     9 
you  this  day,  respecting  the  good  deed  done  to  the 
infirm  man,  by  what  means  he  was  healed ;  (10)  be  10 
it  known  to  you,  and  to  all  the  people  of  Israel, 
that  by  the  name  of  Jesus  Messiah  tlie  Nazarean, 
whom  ye  crucified,  and  whom  God  hath  raised 
from  the  dead,  lo,  by  him,  doth  this  [man]  stand 
here  before  you  recovered.     (11)  This  is  the  stone,  11 
which  ye  builders  rejected ;  and  it  hath  become  the 
head  of  the  corner.     (12)     Neither  is  there  deliv-  12 
erancc^   in  any  other;  tor   there   is  not  another 
name  under  heaven,  which  is  given  to  men,  where- 
by to  live.c — (13)  And  when  they  heard  the  speech  ]  3 


ACTS,    IV. 


219 


14 
15 


16 


17 

18 


19 


20 


21 


of  Simon  and  John,  whicL  they  pronounced  confi- 
dentlj,  they  reflected  that  these  were  unlearned  and 
plebeian f  men;  and  they  were  surprised  at  them, 
and  recognized  them  as  having  been  conversant 
with  Jesus.  (14)  And  they  saw  that  the  lame 
man,  who  had  been  healed,  stood  near  them ;  and 
they  could  say  nothing  to  confront  them.  (15) 
Then  they  commanded  to  remove  them  from  the 
presence  of  the  council ;  and  said  one  to  another  : 
(10)  What  shall  we  do  to  these  men?  For  lo,  that 
a  manifest  sign  hath  been  wrought  by  them,  is 
known  to  all  that  reside  at  Jerusalem,  and  we  can- 
not deny  it.  (17)  But  that  the  fame  of  it  spread 
no  further,  let  us  interdict  their  speaking  any 
more  to  any  man  in  this  name.  (18)  And  they 
called  them,  and  commanded  them  not  to  speak 
nor  to  teach  at  all  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  (19)  Si- 
mon Cephas  and  John  answered,  and  said  to  them: 
Whether  it  be  right  before  God,  that  Ave  hearken 
to  you  more  than  to  God,  judge  ye.  (20)  For  we 
cannot  but  speak  that  which  we  have  seen  and 
heaixl.  (21)  And  they  threatened  them,  and  dis- 
missed them.  For  they  found  no  ground  for  pun- 
ishing them,  because  of  the  people  :  for  every  one 

22  25raised  God  for  what  had  been  done ;  (22)  for  the 
man,  on  whom  this  sign  of  healing  had  been 
wrought,  was  more  than  forty  years  old.s 

And  when  they  were  dismissed,  they  went  to 
their  brethren,  and  told  them  all  that  the  priests 
and  Elders  had  said.  (24)  And  they,  when  they 
heard  [it],  imitedly  lifted  up  their  voice  to  God, 
and  said:  Lord,  thou  art  God,  who  hast  made 
heaven,  and  earth,  and  seas,  and  every  thing  in 

25  them.  (25)  And  it  is  thou  who  hast  said,  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  in  the  mouth  of  David  thy  servant : 
Why  do  the  nations  rage,  and  the  people  imagine 
a  vain  thing?  (26)  The  kings  of  the  earth  and 
the  potentates  stood  up,  and  they  consulted  to- 
gether, against  the  Lord,  and  against  his  anoint- 
ed. ^  (27)  For,  in  reality,  against  thy  holy  Son 
Jesus  whom  thou  hast  anointed, »  Ilerod  and  Pi- 
late, with  the  Gentiles  and  the  congregation  of 
Israel,  have  been  combined  together  in  this  city, 
(28)  to  do  whatever  thy  hand  and  thy  pleasure 
previously  marked  out  to  be  done.  (29)  And 
also    now.  Lord,  behold  and  see  their  menaces: 


23 

24 


26 


27 


28 
29 


Sy.  |.^Q_,jcn 

:=  Gr.  }StCJ- 


s  Sy.  son  of 
more  than  40 
years. 


■Sy. 
his  3Iessiah. 
Sy.  L^^^mId 


220 


^  Sy.  "jj.,^ 

'  Sy.  IZq^ 


Sy.  ]in  Kj 
Sy.  "|^x^L» 


Sy.  4i\« 


ACTS,    V. 

and  grant  to  thy  servants,  that  they  maj  proclaim 
thy  word  boldly,  (30)  while  thou  extendest  thy  30 
hand  for  cures  and  prodigies,  to  be  done  in  the 
name  of  thy  holy  Son  Jesus. — (31)  And  when  31 
they  had  prayed  and  made  supplications,  the  place 
in  which  they  Avcre  assembled  was  shaken ;  and 
they  were  all  tilled  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  spoke 
the  word  of  God  boldly. 

And  in   the  assembly  of  the  persons  that  be-  32 
lieved,  there  was  one  soul,  and  one  mind :  and  no 
one  of  them  said,  of  the  property  he  possessed,  that 
it  was  his  own ;  but  whatever  was  theirs,  it  was  the 
community's.     (33)  And  with  great  power, ^  the  33 
legates  testified  to  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Mes- 
siah :  and  great   grace  ^  was  with  them   all.     (34)  34 
And  no  one  among  them  was  destitute ;  for  those 
who  pos.sessed  lands  or  houses,  sold,  and  brought 
the  price  of  what  was  sold,  (35)  and  placed  [it]  at  35 
the  feet  of  the  legates ;  and  distribution  was  made 
to  every  one,  as  he  had  need.     (36)  And  Joseph,  36 
who  by  the  legates  was  surnamed  Barnabas,  (which 
is  interpreted  Son  of  Consolation,)  a  Levite  of  the 
country  of  Cyprus,  (37)  had  a  field :  and  he  sold  37 
it,  and  brought  the  price  of  it,  and  laid  [it]  before 
the  feet  of  the  legates. 

And  a  certain  man  whose  name  was  Ananias,^  Y, 
with  his  wife  whose  name  was  Sapphira,''  sold  his 
field,  (2)  and  carried  away  [part]  of  the  price  and     2 
concealed  it,  his  wife  consenting ;  and  he  brought 
[a  part]  of  the  money,  and  laid  [it]  before  the  feet 
of  the  legates.     (3)  And  Simon  said  to  him:  Ana-     3 
nias,  why  hath  Satan  so  filled  thy  heart,  that  thou 
shouldst  lie  against  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  conceal  of 
the  money  of  the  price  of  the  field  ?     (4)  Was  it     4 
not  thine  own  before  it  was  sold  ?     And  wnen  sold, 
again  thou  hadst  authority*^  over  the  price  of  it. 
Why  hast  thou  set  thy  heart  to  do  this  purpose? 
Thou  hast  not  lied  against  men,  but  against  God. 
(5)  And  when  Ananias  heard  these  words,  he  fell     5 
down,  and  died.      And  great   fear  was  upon   all 
them  that  heard  [of  it].     (6)  And  the  young  men     6 
among  them  arose,  and  gathered  him  up,  and  car- 
ried [him]  out,  and  buried  him. — (7)  And  when     7 
three  hours  had  passed,  his   wife   also  came  in, 
without  knowing  what  had  occurred.     (8)  Simon     8 


ACTS,    V. 


221 


said  to  her:  Tell  me,  if  ye  sold  the  field  for  this 
price ?«^  And  she  said:  Yes,  for  this  price.  (9) 
Simon  said  to  her:  Since  ye  have  been  equals  in 
tempting  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  lo,  the  feet  of  the 
buriers  of  thy  husband  are  at  the  door,  and  they 
will  carry  thee  out,  (10)  And  immediately  she 
fell  before  their  feet,  and  died.  And  those  young 
men  came  in,  and  found  her  dead ;  and  they  took 
up,  carried  forth,  and  buried  her  by  the  side  of  her 
husband. — (11)  And  great  fear  was  on  all  the  as- 
sembly, ^  and  on  all  them  that  heard  [it]. 

And  there  were  many  signs  and  prodigies 
wrought  by  the  legates  among  the  peojole.  And 
they  were  all  assembled  together  in  the  porch  of 
Solomon.  (13)  And  of  the  others,  no  one  ventured 
to  come  near  them;  but  the  people  magnified 
them.  (14)  And  the  more  were  those  added  who 
feared  the  Lord,  a  multitude  both  of  men  and  of 
women.  (15)  So  that  they  brought  out  into  the 
streets  the  sick,  laid  on  beds,  that  when  Simon 
should  pass,  at  least  his  shadow  might  cover  them. 
(16)  And  many  came  to  them  from  other  cities 
around  Jerusalem,  bringing  the  sick  and  those  who 
had  unclean  spirits ;  and  they  were  all  cured. 

And  the  high  priest  was  filled  with  indignation, 
and  all  those  with  him  who  were  of  the  doctrine*" 
of  the  Sadducees.  (18)  And  they  laid  hands  on  the 
legates,  and  took  and  bound  them  in  prison. 
(19)  Then  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  by  night,  opened 
the  door  of  the  prison,  and  let  them  out ;  and  said 
to  them :  (20)  (ro,  stand  in  the  temple,  and  speak 

21  to  the  people  all  these  words  of  life.  (21)  And  in 
tlie  morning,  they  went  and  entered  into  the  tem- 
ple, and  taught.  And  the  high  priest  and  those 
with  him,  convoked  their  associates  and  the  Elders 
of  Israel,  and  sent  to  the  prison  to  bring  forth  the 
legates.  (22)  And  when  those  sent  by  them  went, 
they  found  them  not  in  the  prison  ;  and  they  re- 

23  turned  and  came  back,  (23)  and  said :  We  found 
the  prison  carefully  closed,  and  also  the  keepers 
standing  before  the  doors;    and  we  opened,  but 

2-4  found  no  one  there.  (24)  And  when  the  chief 
priests  and  rulers  of  the  temple  heard  these  words, 
they  were  astonished  at  them ;  and  they  studied 

25  what  this  could  mean.  (25)  And  one  came  and 
informed  them :  Those  men,  whom  ye  shut  up  in 


10 


11 


12 


13 
14 


15 


16 


17 
18 


19 


20 


00 


^  Sy.  these  pri- 
ces. 


the  church. 


^  or,  sect. 


222 


ACTS,    V. 


Sy. 


prince  and 
Saviour. 


Sy.  words. 


Sy.  ]yoL 


"'  Sy.  be. 

"  Sy.  //  comclh 

not  to  ijour 

hand. 


26 


27 


0 


the  prison,  lo,  they  are  standing  in  the  temple,  and 
teaching  the  people. — (26)  Then  went  the  rulers 
with  attendants,  to  bring  them  without  violence ; 
for  they  feared,  lest  the  people  should  stone  them. 
(27)  And  when  they  had  brought  them,  they 
placed  them  before  the  whole  council ;  and  the 
high  priest  began  to  say  to  them  :  (28)  Did  we  not  28 
strictly  charge  you,  to  teach  no  person  in  this 
name  ?  And  behold,  ye  have  filled  Jerusalem 
with  your  doctrine  ;&  and  ye  would  bring  the  blood 
of  this  man  upon  us. — (29)  And  Simon,  with  the  29 
legates,  answered  and  said  to  them :  God  is  to  be 
obeyed,  rather  than  men.  (30)  The  God  of  our 
fathers  hath  raised  up  that  Jesus,  whom  ye  slew 
when  ye  hanged  him  on  a  tree.  (31)  Him  hath 
God  established  as  a  head  and  vivifier;''  and  hath 
exalted  him  to  his  own  right  hand,  so  that  he 
might  give  repentance  and  remission  of  sins  to 
Israel.  (32)  And  we  are  the  witnesses  of  these 
things;'  and  also  the  Holy  Spirit,  whom  God 
giveth  to  them  that  believe  in  him. — (33)  And 
when  they  heard  these  things,  thc}^  burned  with 
indignation,  and  thought  of  putting  them  to  death. 
(34)  Then  rose  up  one  of  the  Pharisees  whose  name 
Avas  Gamaliel, k  a  teacher  of  the  law,  and  honored  by 
all  the  people ;  and  he  directed  them  to  put  the 
legates  aside  for  a  short  time.  (35)  And  he  said 
to  them :  Men,  sons  of  Israel,  take  heed  to  your- 
selves, and  consider  what  ye  ought  to  do  in  regard 
to  these  men.  (36)  For  before  this  time,  rose  up 
Tlieudas,!  and  said  of  himself,  that  he  was  some 
great  one ;  and  there  went  after  him  about  four 
hundred  men.  And  he  was  slain ;  and  they  who 
went  after  him,  were  dispersed  and  became  as 
nothing.  (37)  And  after  him,  rose  up  Judas  a 
Galilean,  in  the  days  when  the  people  were  enrolled 
for  the  capitation  tax;  and  he  seduced  much 
people  after  him.  And  he  died,  and  all  they  that 
went  after  him  were  dispersed.  (38)  And  now,  I 
say  to  you :  Desist  from  these  men,  and  let  them 
alone.  For  il"  this  device  and  this  work  originate™ 
from  men,  they  will  dissolve  and  come  to  nothing. 
(39)  But  if  it  be  from  God,  it  is  not  in  your  power" 
to  frustrate  it :  that  ye  may  not  be  found  placing 
yourselves  in  opposition  to  God. — And  they  as- 
sented to .  him.     (-10)  And  they  called  the  legates,  40 


32 


33 


34 


35 


36 


38 


39 


ACTS,    VI. 

and  scourged  them,  and  commanded  tliem  not  to 
teach  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  dismissed  them. 

41  (41)  And  they  went  from  before  them,  rejoicing 
that  they  were  worthy  to  sufi'er  abuse  on  account 

42  of  that  name.  (42)  And  they  ceased  not  to  teach 
daily,  in  the  temple  and  at  home,  and  to  preach 
concerning  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah. 

VI.  And  in  those  days,  when  the  disciples  had  be- 
come numerous,  the  Grecian  disciples  murmured 
against  the  Hebrew,  because  their  widows  were 
neglected  in  the  daily  ministration^^  [to  the  needy]. 

2  (2)  And  the  twelve  legates  convoked  the  whole 
company  of  the  disciples,  and  said  to  them :  It  is 
not  proper,  "^  that  we  should  neglect  the  word  of 

3  God,  and  serve  tables.  .  (3)  Therefore  brethren, 
search  out,  and  elect  from  among  you,  seven  men 
of  whom  there  is  good  testimony,  men  full  of  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord,  and  of  wisdom ;  that  we  may 

4  place  them  over  this  business :  (4)  and  we  will 
continue  in  prayer,  and  in  the  ministration  of  the 

5  word.  (5)  And  this  proposal^  was  acceptable  be- 
fore all  the  people.  And  they  elected  Stephen,  a 
man  who  was  full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit ; 
and  Philip,  and  Prochorus,  and  Nicanor,  and 
Timon,  and  Parmenas,  and  Nicolas  an  Antiochian 

6  proselyte.'^  (6)  These  stood  before  the  legates ; 
and  when  they  had  prayed,  they  laid  the  hand  on 

7  them. — (7)  And  the  word  of  God  increased,  and 
the  number  of  disciples  was  enlarged  at  Jerusalem 
greatly ;  and  many  people  from  among  the  Jews, 
were  obedient  to  the  faith. 

8  And  Stephen  was  full  of  grace  and  energy  ;" 
and  he  wrought  signs  and  prodigies  among  the 

9  people.  (9)  And  there  rose  up  some  of  the  syna- 
gogue which  is  called  that  of  the  freed  men,  Cyre- 
nians,  and  Alexandrians,  and  persons  from  Cilicia 
and  from  Asia ;  and  they  disputed  with  Stephen. 

10  (10)  And  they  could  not  withstand  the  Avisdom  and 

11  the  Spirit  that  spoke  by  him.  (11)  Then  they 
sent  men,  and  instructed  them  to  say :  We  have 
heard   him    speak   words   of    blasphemy,    against 

12  Moses  and  against  God.  (12)  And  they  excited 
the  people,  and  the  Elders,  and  the  Scribes;  and 
they  came,  and  rose  upon  him,  and  seized  him,  and 

13  carried  him  into  the  midst  of  the  council.    (13)  And 


223 


•■  Sy.  jji^a. 


Sy.  icoriL 


Sy.  15 


'^ 


Sy.U- 


224 


ACTS,    VII. 


or,  in  Mesopo- 
tamia. 


Sy.  ^i-*^ 


«  Sy.  toZUj 


Sy. 'U.^i 


14 


15 


they  set  up  false  witnesses,  who  said:  This  man 
ceaseth  not  to  utter  words  contrar}^  to  the  hiw,  and 
against  this  holy  place.  (14)  For  we  have  heard 
him  say,  that  this  Jesus  the  Nazarean  will  destroy 
this  place,  and  will  change  the  rites  which  Moses 
delivered  to  you.  (15)  And  all  they  who  were 
sitting  in  the  council  looked  upon  him,  and 
they  beheld  his  face,  as  the  face  of  an  angel. — 
(Vil.)  And  the  high  priest  asked  him :  Are  these  YII. 
things  so  ?  (2)  And  he  said :  Men,  brethren,  and  2 
our  fiithers,  hear  ye.  The  God  of  glory  appeared 
to  our  father  Abraham,  when  he  was  between  the 
rivers,^  before  he  came  to  reside  in  Charran; 
(3)  and  he  said  to  him:  Depart  from  thy  country,  3 
and  from  thy  kindred,  and  go  to  a  land  which  I 
will  show  to  thee.  (4)  And  then  Abraham  de-  4 
parted  from  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans,  and  came 
and  dwelt  in  Charran.^  And  from  there,  after  his 
father  had  died,  God  removed  him  to  this  land,  in 
which  3^e  this  day  dwell.  (5)  And  he  did  not  give  5 
him  an  inheritance  in  it,  not  even  a  foot-track :  but 
he  promised  that  he  woald  give  it  him,  as  an  inher- 
itance to  him  and  to  his  seed,  when  as  yet  he  had 
no  son.  (6)  And  God  conversed  with  him,  and 
said  to  him :  Thy  seed  will  be  a  sojourner  in  a 
foreign  land  ;  and  they  will  reduce  it  to  servitude, 
and  will  treat  it  ill,   during  four  hundred  years. 

(7)  And  the  nation,  to  whom  they  perform  bond- 
service, I  will  judge,  saith  God.  And  afterwards, 
they  will  go  out,  and  will  worship  me  in  this  land. 

(8)  And  he  gave  them  the  covenant<=  of  circumci- 
sion.    And  then  he  begat  Isaac,  and  circumcised 
him  the  eighth  day.     And  Isaac  begat  Jacob  :  and 
Jacob  begat  our  twelve  fathers. — {9)   And  those 
our    fathers   envied   Joseph,   and   sold   him   into 
Egypt:  but  God  was  with  him,  (10)  and  delivered  10 
him  from  all  his  afflictions ;  and  gave  him  favor  and 
wisdom  before  Pharaoh,  king  of  Egypt,  and  he 
made  him  chiefs  over  Egypt,  and  over  all  his  house. 
(11)  And  there  was  a  famine  and  great  distress  in  11 
all  Egypt,  and  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  and   our 
fathers  lacked  food.     (12)  And  when  Jacob  heard  12 
that  there  was  bread-stuff  in  Egypt,  he  sent  our 
fathers  a  first  time.     (13)  And  when  they  went  the  13 
second  time,  Joseph  made  himself  known  to  his 
brethren ;  and  the  kindred  of  Joscj^h  was  known 


6 


9 


ACTS,    VII. 


225 


14  to  Pharaoh.  (14)  And  Joseph  sent  and  brouglit 
his  fatlier  Jacob,  and  all  his  family  ;  and  they  were 

15  in  number  seventy  and  five  souls.^  (15)  And 
Jacob  went  down  into  Egypt ;  and  he  died  there, 

16  he  and  our  fathers.  (16)  And  he  was  transported 
to  Sychem,  and  was  deposited  in  the  sepulchre 
which  Abraham  bought  with  money  of  the  sons  of 

17  Emmor. — (17)  And  when  the  time  arrived  for  that 
which  God  had  promised  to  Abraham  with  an 
oath,  the  people  had  multiplied  and  become  strong, 

18  in  Egypt:  (18)  until  there  arose  another  king  over 

19  Egypt,  who  knew  not  Joseph.  (19)  And  he  dealt 
craftily  with  our  kindred,  and  ill-treated  our  fathers, 
and  gave  orders  that  their  infants  should  be  cast 

20  away,  and  should  not  live. — (20)  At  that  time  was 
Moses  born ;  and  he  was  lovely  to  God:^  and  he 
was  nursed  three  months  in    his   father's   house. 

21  (21)  And  when  he  was  cast  out,  by  his  people,  the 
daughter  of  Pharaoh  found  him,  and  brought  him 

22  up  for  her  own  son.  (22)  And  Moses  was  instructed 
in  all  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians ;  and  he  was 
eminents'    in   his   words,    and   also  in   his   deeds. 

23  (23)  And  when  he  was  forty  years  old,  it  came 
into  his  heart  to  visit  his  brethren,  the  children  of 

21  Israel.  (24)  And  he  saw  one  of  the  raceii  of  his 
kindred  treated  with  violence;  and  he  avenged 
him,  and  did  him  justice,  and  killed  the  Egyptian 

25  who  had  abused  him.  (25)  And  he  supposed 
that  his  brethren  the  sons  of  Israel  would  have  un- 
derstood, that  by  his  hand  God  would  give  them 

26  deliverance ;  but  they  understood  not.  (26)  And 
on  another  day,  he  appeared  to  them,  as  they  were 
quarrelling  one  with  another.  And  he  exhorted 
them  to  become  reconciled,  saying:  Men,  ye  are 
brethren ;    why  do  ye  seek  to  harm  each  other  ? 

27  (27)  But  he  who  did  the  wrong  to  his  fellow,  re- 
pulsed him  from  him,  and  said  to  him :  Who  con- 

28  stituted  thee  a  ruler  and  a  judge  over  us?  (28)  Dost 
thou  seek  to  kill  me,  as  thou  killedst  the  Egyptian 

29  yesterday?  (29)  And  Moses  fled  at  that  speech, 
and  became  a  sojourner  in  the  land  of  Midian.' 

80  And  he  had  two  sons. — (30)  And  when  forty  years 
had  been  passed  by  him^  there,  the  angel  of  the 
Lord  appeared  to  him  in  the  wilderness  of  mount 

31  Sinai,  in  a  fire  that  burned  in  a  bush.  (31)  And 
when  Moses  saw  [it],  he  admired  the  sight:  and  as 


or,  persons. 


f  or,  very  lovely. 


^  Sy.  j_.Al 
■>  Sy.  sons. 


'  Sy.  ^ylD 

^  Sy.  were  full 
to  him. 


226 


ACTS,    VII. 


Sy.  in  a  \oice. 


'°  Sy.  I  seeing 
have  seen. 


Sy. 

Sy.  ^5 


he  drew  near  to  behold  [it],  the  Lord  said  to  hira, 
audibly  :^  (32)  I  am  the  God  of  thy  fathers,  the  God  32 
of  Abraham,  and  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob.     And 
Moses  trembled,  and  dared  not  to  gaze  at  the  sight. 
(33)  And  the  Lord  said  to  him:  Loose  thy  shoes  33 
from  thy  feet ;  for  the  ground  on  which  thou  stand- 
est  is  holy.    (34)  I  have  attentively  seenm  the  afflic-  3-i 
tioii  of  my  people,  who  are  in  Egypt ;  and  I  have 
heard  their  groans,  and  have  come  down  to  deliver 
them.     And  now,  come,  I  will  send  thee  to  Egypt. 
— (35)   This  Moses,  whom  they  rejected,   saying,  35 
Who  constituted  thee  a  ruler  and  judge  over  us  ? 
this  same  did  God,  by  the  hand  of  the  angel  that 
appeared  to  him  in  the  bush,  send  to  them  to  be 
their  captain  and  deliverer.     (36)  He  it  was  that"  36 
brought  them  out,  working  signs  and  wonders  and 
prodigies  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  at  the  sea  of 
rushes,  and  in  the  desert,  forty  years. — (37)  This  37 
Moses  is  the  man  who  said  to  the  children  of  Israel: 
A  prophet,  like  me,  will  the  Lord  God  raise  up 
to  you  from  among  your  brethren;   to  him  give 
ear.     (38)  He  it  was,  who  was  in  the  congregation  38 
in  the  wilderness,  with  the  angel  that  conversed 
with  him  and  with  our  fathers  at  mount  Sinai; 
and  he  it  was,  received  the  living  words  to  give 
[them]  to  us.     (39)   And  our  fathers  would  not  39 
hearken   to  him,  but  forsook  him,   and  in  their 
hearts    returned     again    to    Egypt;     (-iO)    when  40 
they  said  to  Aaron :  Make  us  gods  who  may  go 
before  us ;  because,  as  for  this  Moses  who  brought 
us  from  the  land  of  Egypt,  we  know  not  what  hath 
become  of  him.     (41)  And  he  made  them  a  calf  in  41 
those  days ;  and  they  offered  sacrifices  to  idols,  and 
were  voluptuous  with   the  work  of  their  hands. 
(42)  x\nd  God  turned  away,  and  gave  them  up  to  42 
worship  the  hosts  of  heaven :  as  it  is  written  in  the 
book  of  the  prophets:  Did  ye,  for  forty  years,  in 
the  wilderness,  present  to  me  a  slain  animal  or  a 
sacrifice,  ye  sons  of  Israel?     (43)  But  ye  bore  the  43 
tabernacle  of  Malchum,"  and  the  star  of  the  god 
licphon,o    images   which  ye   had   made,  that  ye 
might  bow  down  to  them.     I  will  transport  you 
beyond  Babylon. — (44)  Lo,  the  tabernacle  of  the  44 
testimony  of  our  fathers,  was  in  the  wilderness;  as 
he  who  talked  with  Moses,  commanded  to  make  it 
after  the  form  which  he  showed  him.     (45)  And  45 


ACTS,    VIII. 


227 


46 

47 

48 


50 
51 


52 


tliis  same  tabernacle,  our  fathers,  with  Joshua, 
actually  brought  into  the  land  which  God  gave  to 
them  for  an  inheritance  from  those  nations  which  he 
drove  out  before  them ;  and  it  was  borne  about, 
until  the  days  of  David.  (46)  He  found  favor 
before  God ;  and  he  requested,  that  he  might  find 
a  residence  for  the  God  of  Jacob.  (47)  But  Solo- 
mon built  the  house.  (48)  Yet  the  most  High 
lodgeth  not  in  a  work  of  [human]  hands ;  as  saith 

49  the  prophet :  (49)  Heaven  is  my  throne,  and  earth 
the  footstool  under  my  feet.  What  is  the  house, 
ye  will  build  for  me  ?  saith  the  Lord :  or,  what  is 
the  place  of  my  Vepose  ?  (50)  Lo,  hath  not  my 
hand  made  all  these  things? — (51)  O  ye  stiff  of 
neck,  and  uncircumcised  in  their  heart,  and  in  their 
hearing ;  ye  do  always  set  yourselves  against  the 
Holy  Spirit ;  as  your  fathers,  so  also  ye.  (52)  For, 
which  of  the  prophets  did  not  your  fathers  perse- 
cute and  kill,  [even]  them,  who  foretold  the  coming 
of  the  Just  One,  whom  ye  delivered  up  and  slew  ? 

53  (53)  And  ye  have  received  the  law  by  the  ordina- 
tion? of  angels,  and  have  not  kept  it. 

And  when  they  heard  these  things,  they  were 
filled  with  rage  in  their  souls ;  and  they  gnashed 
their  teeth  against  him.  (55)  And  he,  as  he  was 
full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  looked  towards 
heaven,  and  saw  the  glory  of  God,  and  Jesus  stand- 
ing at  the  right  hand  of  God.  (56)  And  he  said  : 
Lo,  I  see  heaven  open,  and  the  Son  of  man  standing 
on  the  right  hand  of  God.  (57)  And  they  cried 
out  with  a  loud  voice,  and  stopped  their  ears,  and 
all  rushed  upon  him.  (58)  And  they  seized  him, 
and  hurried  him  out  of  the  city,  and  stoned  him. 
And  they  who  testified  against  him,  laid  their 
clothes  at  the  feet  of  a  certain  j^oung  man  who  was 
called  Saul.  (59)  And  they  stoned  Stephen,  while 
he  prayed  and  said :  Our  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my 
spirit.  (60)  And-  when  he  had  kneeled  down, 
he  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  said :  Our  Lord, 
establish  not  this  sin  against  them.     And  when  he 

Vni.had  said  this,  he  fell  asleep.^  (VHL)  And  Saul 
was  consenting  and  participating  in  his  death. — 
And  there  was,  in  that  day,  a  great  persecution 
against  the  church^  that  was  at  Jerusalem ;  and 
they  were  all  dispersed,  except  the  legates,  among 
the  villages  of  Judaea  and  likewise  among  the  Sa- 


54 
55 


56 

57 


58 


59 


60 


=z  precepl. 


Sy.  .nn»  = 

he  laid  himself 
down. 

Sy.  Ua 


228 


ACTS,    VIII. 


or,  zoord. 


Sy- 


^VjiO") 


Sy.]J. 


Sy.  ^SV)» 


maritans.    (2)  And  believing  men  gathered  up  and     2 
buried  Stephen.      And  they  lamented  over  hi  in 
greatly.     (8)  And  Saul  persecuted  the  church  of     3 
Grod,  entering  houses,  and  dragging  forth  men  and 
women  and  committing  them  to  prison. 

And  they  who  were  dispersed,  travelled  about,     4 
and  preached  the  word  of  God.     (5)  And  Philip     5 
went  down  to  a  city  of  the  Samaritans,  and  preached 
concerning  the  Messiah.    (6)  And  when  the  people     6 
who  were  there  heard  his  discourse,''  they  gave  ear 
to  him,  and  acquiesced  in  all  that  he  said ;  because 
they  s.iw  the  signs  which  he  wrought.      (7)  For     7 
many  who  were  possessed  by  unclean  spirits,  cried 
with  a  loud  voice,  and  came  out  of  them :   and 
others,  who  w«re  paralytic  and  lame,  were  healed. 
(8)  And  there  was  great  joy  in  that  city. — (9)  And     8 
there  was  a  certain  man  there,  whose  name  was     9 
Simon, e  who  had  resided  in  that  city  a  long  time, 
and  who  seduced  the  people  of  the  Samaritans  by 
his  sorceries,  magnifying  himself,  and  sa3'ing,  I  am 
a  great  personage.      (10)    And  they   all   inclined 
towards  him,  great  and  small ;  and  they  said,  This 
is  the  mighty  power^^  of  God.     (11)  And  they  ac- 
quiesced in  him,  because  for  a  long  time  he  had 
astonished  them  by  his  sorceries.     (12)  But  when 
they  gave  credence  to  Philip,  as  he  preached  the 
king;dom  of  God,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Messiah  ;  they  were  baptized,  both  men  and  women. 

(13)  And  Simon  himself  also  believed,  and  was  13 
baptized,  and  adhered  to  Philip.     And  when  he 
saw  the  signs  and  mighty  deeds  which  were  wrought 
by  his  hand,  he  was  surprised  and  astonished. — 

(14)  And  when  the  legates  at  Jerusalem,  heard  that  14 
the  people  of  the  Samaritans  had  received  the  word 

of  God,  they  sent  out  to  them  Simon"  Cephas  and 
John.     (15)    And  they   went  down,   and    prayed  15 
over  them,  that  they  might  receive  the  Holy  Spirit. 
(16)  For  he  was  not  yet  on  any  one  of  them;  and  16 
they  had  only  been  baptized  in  the  name  of  our 
Lord   Jesus.      (17)  Then  they  laid  the  hand  on  17 
them ;  and  they  received  the  Holy  Spirit. — (18)  And  18 
when  Simon  saw  that,  by  the  imposition  of  a  hand 
of  the  legates,  the  Holy  Spirit  was  given,  ho-  offered 
them  money,  (19)  saying:  Give  me  also  this  pre-  19 
rogativc,^  that  he  on  whom  I  impose  a  hand,  may 
receive  the  lloly  Spirit.     (20)  Simon  Cephas  said  20 


10 


11 


12 


ACTS,    VIII. 

to  him:    Thy  money  go  with  thee  to  perdition! 
because  thou  hast  supposed,  that  the  gift  of  God 

21  may  be  purchased  by  a  worldly  substance.  (21) 
Thou  hast  no  part  nor  lot  in  this  faith ;  because 

22  thy  heart  is  not  right  before  God.  (22)  Neverthe- 
less, repent  of  this  thy  wickedness,  and  entreat  of 
God,  if  perhaps  the  guile  of  thy  heart  may  be  for- 

23  given  thee.     (23)  For  I  perceive  that  thou  art  in 

24  the  bitter  gall  and  in  the  bonds  of  iniquity.  (24)  Si- 
mon answered  and  said:  Intercede  ye  with  God  for 
me,  that  nothing  of  which  ye  have  mentioned  may 

25  come  upon  me. — (25)  And  Simon  and  John,  when 
they  had  testified,  and  had  taught  them  the  word 
of  God,  returned  to  Jerusalem.  And  they  had 
preached  in  many  villages  of  the  Samaritans. 

26  And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  spake  with  Philip, 
and  said  to  him:  Arise,  go  to  the  south,  along  the 
desert  way  that  leadeth  down  from  Jeursalem  to 

27  Gaza.  (27)  And  he  arose  and  went.  And  there 
met  him  a  eunuch,  who  had  come  from  Cush,&  an 
officer  of  Candace,  queen  of  the  Cushites,  who  had 
charge  of  all  her  treasure  ;    and  he  had  come  to 

28  worship  a^  Jerusalem.  (28)  And  as  he  turned  to 
go,  he  was  sitting  in  his  chariot,  and  was  reading 

29  in  Isaiah  the  prophet.  (29)  And  the  Holy  Sjjirit 
said  to  Philip:  Go  near,  and  join  thj^self  to  the 

30  chariot.  (30)  And  when  he  came  near,  he  heard 
him  reading  in  Isaiah  the  prophet ;  and  he  said  to 
him:    Understandest   thou    what    thou    readest? 

31  (31)  And  he  said :  How  can  I  understand,  unless 
some  one  instruct  me  ?  And  he  requested  of 
Philip,  that  he  would  come  up  and  sit  with  him. 

32  (32)  And  the  section  of  scripture  in  which  he  was 
reading,  was  this :  As  a  Iamb  to  the  slaughter  he 
was  led  away,  and  as  a  sheep  before  the  shearer  is 
silent,  so  also  he  in  his  humility  opened  not  his 

33  mouth.  (33)  From  prison  and  from  judgment  he 
was  carried :  and  his  generation, ^  who  will  de- 
clare ?  for  his  life  is  taken  away  from  the  earth. 

34  (34)  And  the  eunuch  said  to  Philip :  I  pray  thee, 
of  whom  speaketh  the  prophet  this '?  of  himself,  or 

35  of  some  other  person?  (35)  Then  Philip  opened 
his  mouth,  and,  from  that  scripture,  began  to  preach 

86  to  him  concerning  our  Lord  Jesus.  (36)  And  as 
they  proceeded  on  the  way,  they  came  to  a  certain 
place  in  which  there  was  water.     x\nd  the  eunuch 


229 


^  Sy.  .^QJD 


Sy.  CJl5> 


230 


ACTS,    IX. 


*  or,  roatj. 


'  or,  sharp 
points. 


r.  U-IJ-K. 


said:  Lo,  [here  is]  water;  what  doth  forbid,  that  I 
should  be  baptized?     (37)  [And  Philip  said:  If  37 
thou  believest  with  all  thy  heart,  it  is  allowable. 
And  he  answered,  and  said :  I  believe  that  Jesus 
Messiah  is  the  Son  of  God.]*     (38)  And  he  com-  38 
manded  the  chariot  to  stop;  and  they  both  went 
down  to  the  water,  and  Philip  baptized  the  eunuch. 
(39)  And  when  they  came  up  from  the  water,  the  39 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  caught  away  Philip ;  and  the 
eunuch  saw  him  no  more ;  but  he  went  on  his  way 
rejoicing.     (-iO)  And  Philip  was  found  at  Azotus ;  40 
and  from  there  he  travelled  about,  and  preached 
in  all  the  cities,  until  he  came  to  Caesarea. 

And  Saul  was  still  full  of  threats  and  deadly  IX. 
hatred  against  the  disciples  of  our  Lord.     (2)  And     2 
he  requested  that  a  letter  from  the  high  priest 
might  be  given  him,  unto  Damascus  to  the  syna- 
gogues;   that  if  he  should  find  persons  pursuing 
this  course,  =^  men  or  women,  he  might  bind  and 
bring  them  to  Jerusalem.      (3)    And  as  he  was     3 
going,  and  began  to  approach  Damascus,  suddenly 
there  was  poured  upon  him  a'  light  frolfc  heaven, 
(■i)  And   he  fell  to  the  ground ;  and  he  heard  a     -i 
voice  which  said  to  him :  Saul !  Saul !  why  perse- 
cutest  thou  me?     It  will  be  hard  for  thee  to  kick 
against  the  goads.''      (5)    He   replied,   and   said :     5 
Who  art  thou,  my  Lord?     And  our  Lord  said  :  I 
am  Jesus  the  Nazarean,  whom  thou  persecutest. 
(6)  But  arise  and  go  into  the  city,  and  there  it  will     6 
be  told  thee  what  thou  oughtest  to  do.     (7)  And     7 
the  men  who  travelled  with  him  in  the  way,  stood 
amazed ;  for  they  heard  merelj^  the  voice,  and  no 
one  was  visible  to  them.     (8)  And  Saul  arose  from     8 
the  ground ;  and  nothing  was  visible  to  him,  with 
his  eyes  opened.     And  they  took  him  by  the  hand, 
and  led  him  into  Damascus.     (9)  And  he  had  no     9 
sight  for  three  days;  and  he  neither  ate  nor  drank. 
— (10)  And  there  was  in  Damascus  a  certain  disci-  10 
pic,  whose  name  was  Ananias."      And  the  Lord 
said  to  him,  in  a  vision  :  Ananias !     And  he  said : 
Lo,  I  [am  here],  my  Lord.     (11)  And  our  Lord  11 
said  to  him :  Arise,  go  to  the  street  which  is  called 
Straight;  and  inquire  in  the  house  of  Judas,  for 


*  This  37tii  verse  b  not  in  any  of  the  earlier  editions,  and  is  excluded  from 
the  text  of  the  London  editions  of  1816  and  182G. 


12  Saul  who  is  from  the  city  of  Tarsus :  for,  lo,  while 
he  prayed,  (12)  he  saw  in  vision  a  man  named 
Ananias,  who  came  and  laid  his  hand  upon  him, 

13  that  his  eyes  might  be  opened.  (13)  And  Ananias 
said:  My  Lord,  I  have  heard  of  this  man,  from 
many,  how  much  evil  he  hath  perpetrated  towards 

11:  thy  saints  at  Jerusalem.  (14)  And,  lo,  here  also, 
he  hath  authority  from  the  chief  priests,  to  bind  all 

15  them  that  call  on  thy  name.  (15)  The  Lord  said 
to  him :  Arise  and  go ;  for  he  is  to  me  a  chosen 
vessel,  to  carry  my  name  to  the  Gentiles,  ^^  and  to 

16  kings,  and  among  the  sons  of  Israel.  (l6)  For  I 
will  show  him,  how  much  he  is  to  suifer  on  account 

17  of  my  name. — (17)  Then  Ananias  went  to  the 
house  to  him ;  and  he  laid  his  hand  upon  him,  and 
said  to  him  :  Saul,  my  brother,  our  Lord  Jesus,  he 
who  appeared  to  thee  by  the  way  as  thou  camest, 
hath  sent  me,  that  thy  eyes  might  be  opened,  and 

18  thou  be  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  (18)  And  im- 
mediately there  fell  from  his  eyes  something  like 
a  scab ;  and  his  eyes  were  opened.     And  he  arose 

19  and  was  baptized.  (19)  And  he  took  food,  and 
was  invigorated. — And  he  was  [some]   daj^s  with 

20  the  disciples  of  Damascus.  (20)  And  forthwith  he 
announced  Jesus,  in  the  synagogues  of 'the  Jews, 

21  that  he  is  the  Son  of  God.  (21)  And  all  they  that 
heard  him  were  amazed  ;  and  they  said :  Is  not 
this  he,  who  persecuted  all  them  that  call  on  this 
name  in  Jerusalem  ?  xVnd  lo,  for  this  very  thing 
also,  was  he  sent  hither,  that  he  might  bind  and 

22  carry  them  to  the  chief  priests.  (22)  But  Saul  was 
the  more  strengtherfed ;  and  he  confounded  those 
Jews  who  dwelt  at  Damascus,  while  he  demonstrated 

23  that  this  is  the  Messiah. — (23)  And  when  he  had 
been  there  many  days,   the  Jews  formed  a  con- 

21  spiracy  against  him,  to  kill  him.  (21)  And  the 
plot  which  the}^  sought  to  execute  upon  him,  was 
made  known  to  Saul :  and  they  watched  the  gates 
of  the  city  by  day  and  by  night,  in  order  to  kill 

25  him.  (25)  Then  the  disciples  placed  him  in 
a  basket, e  and  let  him  down  from  the  wall  by 
night. 

26  And  he  went  to  Jerusalem ;  and  he  wished  to 
join  himself  with  the  disciples,  but  they  were  all 
afraid  of  him,  and  did  not  believe  that  he  was  a  dis- 

27  ciple.     (27)  But  Barnabas  took  him,  and  brought 


or,  nations. 


=  Gr.  tftfupij. 


232 


Gr.  churches. 


E  Sy.  joli 


''  Sy.  |sQ_i 


Sy.lAxn^ 


ACTS,    IX. 

him  to  the  legates,  and  related  to  them  how  the 
Lord  appeared  to  him  in  the  waj,  and  how  he  con- 
versed wMth  him;  and  how,  in  Damascus,  he  had 
discoursed  openly  in  the  name  of  Jesus.     (28)  And  28 
he    went   in   and   out    with    them,    at   Jerusalem. 
(29)  And  he  spoke  openly  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  29 
and   disputed  with   those   Jews  who   understood 
Greek.     But  they  wished  to  kill  him :    (80)   and  30 
when  the  brethren  knew  [it],  they  conducted  him 
by  night  to  CjBsarea,  and  from  there  they  sent  him 
to  Tarsus. — (31)  Moreover  the  church,^  in  all  Judasa,  31 
and  in  Galilee,  and  in  Samaria,  had  peace  and  was 
edified;    and  it  walked  in    the  fear  of  God,   and 
abounded  in  the  consolation  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
— (32)  And  it  occurred,  that,  as  Simon  travelled  32 
about  the  cities,  he  came  down  to  the  saints  also 
who  dwelt  in  the  city  of  Lydda.s     (33)  And  he  33 
found  a  certain  man  whose  name  was  ^neas,  who 
had  lain  on  a  bed  and  been  paralytic  eight  years. 
(34)    And  Simon  said  to  him :    ^Eneas,  Jesus  the  34 
Messiah  doth  heal  thee ;  arise,  and  spread  thy  bed. 
And  he  rose  up  immediately.     (35)  And  all  they  35 
that  dwelt  at  Lydda  and  Saron,  saw  him;  and  they 
turned  to  God. 

And  there  Avas  in  the  city  of  Joppa,^  a  certain  36 
female  disciple  named  Tabitha  ;   [and]  she  was  rich 
in    good  works,  and  in  the  alms  which  she  did. 

(37)  And  she  fell  sick  in  those  daj's,  and  died  ;  and  37 
they  washed  her,  and  laid  her  in  an  upper  room. 

(38)  And  the  disciples  heard  that  Simon  was  in  the  38 
city  of  Lydda,  which  is  near  to  Joppa ;  and  they 
sent  two  men  to  him,  to  request  of  him  that  he 
would  not  delay  to  come  to  them.  (39)  And  39 
Simon  arose  and  went  with  them.  And  when  he 
arrived,  they  conducted  him  to  the  chamber ;  and 
there  were  assembled  around  her  all  the  widows, 
weeping,  and  showing  him  the  tunics  and  the 
cloaks  which  Tabitha  had  given  them  when  alive. 

(40)  And  Simon  put  all  the  people  out,  and  fell  on  40 
his  knees  and  prayed;  and  he  turned  to  the  corpse, 
and  said :  Tabitha,  arise.'      And  she  opened  her 
eyes;    and   when   she    saw    Simon,    she    sat   up. 

(41)  And  he  reached  to  her  his  hand,  and  raised  41 
her  up  :  and  he  called  the  saints  and  the  widows, 
and  presented  her  to  them  alive.     (42)  And  this  42 
became   known   throughout  the  city ;    and  many 


ACTS,    X. 


233 


43  believed  on  our  Lord.  (43)  And  he  tarried  in 
Joppa  not  a  few  days :  and  he  lodged  in  the  house 
of  Simon  a  tanner. 

X.'  And  there  was  a  certain  man  in  Caesarea,  whose 
name  was  Cornelius,  a  centurion  of  the  regiment^ 

2  called  the  Italian.  (2)  And  he  was  righteous,  and 
feared  God,  he  and  all  his  house  ;  [and]  he  did 
much  alms  among  the  people,  and  prayed  to  God 

3  at  all  times.  (3)  This  man  distinctly  saw,  in  a 
vision,  aboiit  the  ninth  hour  of  the  day,  an  angel 
of  God,  who  came  in  to  him  and  said  to  him :  Cor- 

4  nelius!  (4)  And  he  looked  upon  him,  and  was 
afraid;  and  he  said:  What,  my  Lord?  And  the 
angel  said  to  him  :  Thy  praj^ers  and  thy  alms  have 

5  come  up  in  remembrance  before  God.  (5)  And 
now,  send  men  to  the  city  of  Joppa,   and  bring 

6  Simon  who  is  called  Cephas.  ((3)  Lo,  he  lodgeth 
in  the  house  of  Simon  the    tanner,   which  is  by 

7  the  side  of  the  sea.  (7)  And  when  the  angel  that 
talked  with  him  was  gone,  he  called  two  of  his 
household,''  and  a  soldier  who  feared  God  and  was 

8  obedient  to  him.     (8)  And  he  related  to  them  all 

9  that  he  had  seen,  and  sent  them  to  Joppa. — (9) 
And  the  next  day,  as  they  travelled  the  road  and 
approached  the  city,  Simon  ascended  the  roof  to 

10  pray,  at  the  sixtli  hour.  (10)  And  he  became 
hungry,  and  desired  to  eat.  And  while  they 
were    providing   for   him,  he   fell'^  into    a   trance. 

11  (11)  And  he  saw  the  heavens  opened,  and  a  certain 
vessel  fastened  at  the  four  corners,  and  it  was  like 
a  great  sheet;  and  it  descended  from  heaven  to  the 

12  earth.  (12)  And  there  were  in  it  all  fourfooted 
animals,    and  creeping  things    of  the   earth,    and 

13  fowls  of  heaven.     (13)  And  a  voice  came  to  him, 

14  which  said  :  Simon,  arise,  slay  and  eat.  (14)  And 
Simon  said  :  Far  be  it,  my  Lord  :  for  never  have  I 

15  eaten  any  thing  unclean  and  polluted.  (15)  And 
again  the  second  time,  there  was  a  voice  to  him : 
What  God  hath  cleansed,  make  thou  not  unclean. 

16  (16)  And  this  was  done  three  times ;  and  the 
vessel  was  taken  up  to  heaven. 

17  And  while  Simon  was  wondering  with  himself, 
what  the  vision  he  had  seen  could  denote,  the  men 
who  were  sent  by  Cornelius  arrived;  and  they 
inquired  for  the  house  in  which  Simon  lodged,  and 


or,  cohort. 


■>  Sy.  sons  of  his 
house. 


■  Sy.  a  trance 
fell  on  him. 


234 


ACTS,    X. 


^  Sy.  sons  of  his 
kindred. 


«  Sy.  vp  to  noic. 


came  and  stood  at  the  gate  of  the  court.     (18)  And  18 
there  thej  called  out,  and  asked  if  Simon  Avho  is 
called   Cephas   lodged    there?     (19)   And    while  19 
Simon  was  reflecting  on  the  vision,  the  Spirit  said 
to   him :  Lo,  three  men   are    inquiring   for   thee. 

(20)  Arise,  go  down,  and  accompany  them ;  and  20 
let  not  thy  mind  hesitate,  for  I  have  sent  them. — 

(21)  Tlieu  Simon  went  down  to  the  men,  and  said  21 
to  them :  I  am  he  for  whom  ye  inquire :  what  is 
the  cause  for  which   ye   have  come?     (22)  They  22 
say  to  him:  A  certain  man  whose  name  is  Cor- 
nelius, a  centurion  fearing  God,  and  of  whom  all 
the  people  of  the  Jews  bear  good  report,  was  told 

in  vision,  by  a  holy  angel,  to  send  and  bring  thee 
to  his  house,   that  he  might  hear  discourse  from 
thee.     (23)  And  Simon   led   them   in,  and  enter-  23 
tained  them  where  he  lodged. 

And  the  following  day,  he  arose,  departed,  and 
went   with   them :  and   some   of  the  brethren   of 
Joppa  also  went  with  them.     (2-4:)  And  the  next  24 
day,   they  entered  Caisarea.     And   Cornelius  was 
expecting  them :  and  all  the  kindred'^  of  his  family, 
and    also   such   intimate   friends  as  he  had,  were 
assembled  with  him. — (25)  And  as  Simon  came  up,  25 
Cornelius  met  him,  and  fell  down  worshipping  at 
his  feet.     (26)  And  Simon  raised  him  up,  and  said  26 
to  him:  Arise  ;  I  also  am  a  man.     (27)  And  as  he  27 
talked  with  him,  he  went  in,  and  found  that  many 
had  come  there.     (28)  And  he  said  to  them :  Ye  28 
know,  that  it  is  not  lawful  for  a  Jewish  man,  to 
associate  with  an  alien  who  is  not  of  his  race :  but 
God  hath  showed  me,  that  I  should  not  say  of  any 
one,  that  he  is  defiled  or  unclean.     (29)  Therefore  29 
I  came  readily,  when    ye   sent  for    me.     But,  I 
ask  you,  for  what   cause   did  ye   send    for   me? 
(30)  And  Cornelius  said  to  him :  It  is  four  days  30 
ago,*'  that,  lo,  I  was  fasting;  and  at  the  nintli  hour, 
while  I  was  praying  in  my  house,  a  certain  man 
stood  before  me,  clothed  in  white,  (31)  and  said  to  31 
me :  Cornelius,  thy  prayer  is  heard,  and  there  is 
remembrance  of  thy  alms  before  God.     (32)  But  32 
send  to  the  city  of  Joppa,  and  bring  Simon  who  is 
called   Cephas:  lo,  he   lodgeth   in   the   house   of 
Simon  the  tanner,  which   is   by  the   side  of  the 
sea.     And  he  will  come  and  converse  with  thee. 
(33)  And   immediately  I  sent  to  thee ;   and  thou  33 


ACTS,    XL 


285 


f] 


hast  done  well  to  come :  and  lo,  we  are  all  of  us 
before  thee,  and  desirous  to  hear  whatever  is  com- 
manded thee  from  God. 

34  And  Simon  opened  his  mouth,  and  said:  Truly, 
I  discover   that    God  is  no  respecter  of  persons: 

35  (35)  but,  among  all  the  nations,  he  who  feareth 
him,  and  worketh  righteousness,  is  acceptable  with 

36  him.  (36)  For  [this  is]  the  word,  which  he  sent  to 
the  sons  of  Israel,  announcing  to  them  peace  and 
rest  by    Jesus    Messiah, — He   is    Lord   of  all ; — 

37  (37)  and  ye  also  know  the  word,  which  was  in 
all  Judcea,  which  commenced  from  Galilee,  after  the 

38  baptism  that  John  preached,  (38)  concerning  Jesus, 
who  was  of  Nazareth,  whom  God  anointed  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  and  with  power.f  And  he  it  was, 
who  went  about  and  healed  those  that  were  suffer 

39  ing  from  evil,  because   God  was  with  him.     (39 
And  we  [are]  his  witnesses,  as  to  whatever  he  d 
in  all  the  region  of  Judiea  and  in  Jerusalem.     This 
same  person  the  Jews  hanged  on  a  tree,  and  slew 

40  him.  (40)  And  him  did  God  raise  up,  on  the  third 
day ;  and  caused  him  to  be  seen  with  naked  eyes ; 

41  (41)  not  indeed  by  all  the  people,  but  by  us,  who 
were  chosen  of  God  to  be  his  witnesses,  [and]  who 
ate  and  drank  with  him  after  his  resurrecticni  from 

42  the  dead.  (42)  And  he  commanded  us  to  j^roclaim 
and  testify  to  the  people,  that  he  is  appointed?  of 
God  to  be  judge  of  the  living  and  of  the  dead, 

43  (43)  And  of  him  all  the  prophets  testify,  that  who- 
ever believeth  in  his  name,  will  receive  remission 

44  of  sins. — (44)  And  while  Simon  was  uttering  these 
things,   the  Holy  Spirit  overshadowed'*   all    them 

45  that  were  hearing  the  word.  (45)  And  the  circum- 
cised brethren  who  came  with  him,  were  amazed 
and  astonished,  that  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  was 

46  poured  out  upon  the  Gentiles  also.  (46)  For  they 
heard  them  speak  with  diverse  tongues,  and  mag- 

47  nify  God.  (47)  And  Simon  said :  Can  any  one 
forbid  water,  that  those  should  not  be  baptized, 
they  who  have  received,  lo,  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  well 

48  as  we  ?  (48)  Then  he  commanded  them  to  be  bap 
tized  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah.  And 
they  requested  him  to  remain  with  them  [some] 
days. 

XI.     And  it  was  reported   to   the   legates   and  the. 


Sy.U- 


s  Sy.  separated. 


^  or,  covered. 


236 


ACTS,    XI. 


»  Sy.  words. 
^  or,  be  saved. 


'  Sy.  were  siill. 
^  or,  salvation. 


6 


brethren  in  Judsea,  that  the  Gentiles  also  had  re- 
ceived the  word  of  God.  (2)  And  when  Simon 
went  up  to  Jerusalem,  they  who  were  of  the  cir- 
cumcision contended  with  him,  (3)  saying;  that  he 
had  gone  in  to  be  with  uncircumcised  persons,  and 
had  eaten  with  them, — (4)  And  Simon  began  to 
address  them  methodically:  (5)  As  I  was  in  Joppa, 
praying,  I  saw  in  vision,  that  a  certain  vessel  de- 
scended, which  was  like  a  sheet,  and  it  was  tied  at 
its  four  corners;  and  it  descended  from  heaven, 
and  came  to  me.  (6)  And  I  looked  upon  it,  and 
I  saw  that  in  it  were  fourfooted  animals,  and  rep- 
tiles of  the  earth,  and  fowls  of  heaven.  (7)  And 
I  heard  a  voice,  which  said  to  me :  Simon,  arise, 
slay  and  eat.  (8)  And  I  said :  Far  be  it,  my  Lord. 
For  never  hath  any  thing  pojluted  or  unclean 
entered  my  mouth.  (9)  And  again,  a  voice  from 
heaven  said  to  me :  What  God  hath  cleansed,  make 
thou  not  unclean.  (10)  And  this  was  done  three 
times;    and  the  whole  was   taken  up  to  heaven. 

(11)  And  at  the  same  instant^  three  men,  who 
were  sent  to  me  by  Cornelius  from  Csesarea,  came 
and  stood  at  the  gate  of  the  court  where  I  lodged. 

(12)  And  the  Spirit  said  to  me :  Go  with  them, 
without  hesitation.  And  these  six  brethren  went 
also  with  me,  and  we  entered  the  man's  house. 

(13)  And  he  related  to  us,  how  he  had  seen  an 
angel  in  his  house,  who  stood  and  said  to  him : 
Send  to  the  city  of  Joppa,  and  bring  Simon  who 
is  called  Cephas;  (14)  and  he  will  utter  to  thee 
discourses,^  by  which  thou  wilt  live,b  thou  and  all 
thy  house.  (15)  And  when  I  there  commenced 
speaking,  the  Holy  Spirit  overshadowed  them,  as  it 
did  us  from  the  beginning.  (16)  And  I  remem- 
bered the  word  of  our  Lord,  when  he  said :  John 
baptized  with  water,  but  ye  shall  be  baptized  with 
the  Holy  Spirit.  (17)  If  then  God  equally  gave  17 
the  gift  to  the  Gentiles  that  believed  in  our  Lord 
Jesus  Messiah,  as  he  did  to  us :  who  was  I,  that  I 
could  forbid  God? — (18)  And  when  they  heard 
these  words,  they  desisted  ;*=  and  they  glorilied 
God  and  said :  Now  to  the  Gentiles  also  doth  God 
give  repentance  unto  life.'' 

And  they  who  were  dispersed,  by  the  oppres- 
sion which  occurred  on  account  of  Stephen,  trav- 
elled as  far  as  Phenicia,  and  even  to  the  country 


9 


10 
11 


12 


1-1 


15 


16 


18 


19 


ACTS,    XII. 

of  Cyprus,  and  to  Antioch,  speaking  the  word  to 

20  none  except  to  Jews  only,  (20)  And  there  were 
some  of  them  from  Cyprus  and  from  Cyrene,  who 
went  up  to  Antioch,  and  spoke  to  the  Greeks,  and 

21  preached  concerning  our  Lord  Jesus.  (21)  And 
the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  with  them ;   and  many 

22  beheved,  and  turned  to  the  Lord.  (22)  And  this 
camee  to  the  ears  of  the  sons  of  the  church  at 
Jerusalem:  and  they  sent  Barnabas  to  Antioch. 

23  (23)  And  when  he  came  there,  and  saw  the  grace 
of  God,  he  rejoiced:  and  he  entreated  them,  that 
with  all   their  heart,  they  would  adhere  to  our 

24  Lord.  (24)  For  he  was  a  good  man,  and  was  full 
of  the   Holy   Spirit,    and   of  faith.      And   many 

25  people  were  added   to  our  Lord. — (25)    And  he 

26  went  away  to  Tarsus,  to  seek  for  Saul.  (26)  And 
when  he  had  found  him,  he  brought  him  with  him 
to  Antioch.  And  a  whole  year  they  met  together 
in  the  church,  and  instructed  many  people. — From 
that  time  forth,  the  disciples  were  first  called 
Christians,  f  at  Antioch. 

27  In  those  days  came  prophets  thither  from  Jeru- 

28  salem.  (28)  And  one  of  them  whose  name  was 
Agabus,  stood  up  and  informed  them,  by  the 
Spirit,  that  there  would  be  a  great  famine  in  all 
the  country.     And  that   famine  occurred  in  the 

29  days  of  Claudius  Caesar.  (29)  And  moreover  the 
disciples,  each  of  them  according  to  his  several 
ability,?  determined  to  send  to  the  relief  of  the 

30  brethren  who  dwelt  in  Judaea.  (30)  And  they 
sent,  by  the  hand  of  Barnabas  and  Saul,  unto  the 
Elders  there. 

XII.  And  at  that  time  Herod  the  king,  who  was  sur- 
named  Agrippa,  laid  hands  on  some  of  the  church, 

2  to  maltreat  them.     (2)  And  he  killed  James  the 

3  brother  of  John  with  the  sword.  (3)  And  when 
he  saw  that  this  pleased  the  Jews,  he  proceeded^ 
also  to  arrest  Simon  Cephas.     And  the  days  of 

4  unleavened  bread  were  then  passing.  (4)  He 
seized  him  and  cast  him  into  prison,''  and  deliv 
ered  him  to  sixteen  soldiers,  who  were  to  guard 
him;    that  he  might,  after  the  passover,  deliver 

5  him  up  to  the  people  of  the  Jews.  (5)  And  while 
Simon  was  in  custody  in  the  prison,  continual 
prayer  to  God  in  his  behalf,  was  oftered  to  God 


237 


«  Sy.  was  lieard 


Sy. 

=  Gr. 

Xpitfriavo?. 


s  or,  means. 


Sy.  added. 

Sy.  hovse  of 
prisoners. 


238 


ACTS,    XII. 


Sy.  pertaining 
to. 


^  Sy.  turned  up- 
on her  course. 

"  Sy.  art  con- 
fused to  be 
confused. 


by  the  church. — (6)  And  on  the  night  before<^  the     6 
morning  in  which  he  was  to  be  delivered  up,  while 
Simon  was  sleeping  between  two  soldiers,  and  was 
bound  with  two  chains,  and  others  were  guarding 
the  doors  of  the  prison ;  (7)  an  angel  of  the  Lord     7 
stood  over  him,  and  a  light  shone  in  all  the  building; 
and  he  pricked  his  side,  and  awaked  him,  and  said 
to  him:  Arise,  instantly.    And  the  chains  fell  from 
his  hands.     (8)  And  the  angel  said  to  him :  Gird     8 
thj  loins,  and  put  on  thy  sandals.     And  he  did  so. 
And  again  he  said  to  him :  Wrap  thyself  in  thy 
cloak,  and  come  after  me.     (9)  And  he  went  out     9 
and    followed    iiim,   not   knowing  that  what   had 
been  done  by  the  angel  was  a  reality ;  for  he  sup- 
posed, that  he  saw  a  vision.     (10)  And  when  the  10 
first  ward  was  passed  and  the  second,  they  came 
to  the  iron  gate,  -and  it  opened  to  them-of  its  own 
accord.     And  when  they  had  gone  out,  and  had 
passed  one  street,  the  angel  departed  from  him. 
(11)  Then  Simon  recognized  [where  he  was]  ;  and  11 
he  said :  Now  I  know,  in  reality,  that  God  hath 
sent  his  angel,  and  delivered  me  from  the  hand  of 
Herod  the  king,  and  from  what  the  Jews  were 
devising  against  me. — (12)  And  when  he  had  con-  12 
sidered,  he  went  to  the  house  of  Mary,  the  mother 
of  John  surnamed  Mark ;  because  many  brethren 
were  assembled  there  and  praying,     (lo)  And  he  13 
knocked  at  the  gate  of  the  court;    and  a  maid 
named  Ehoda  came  to  reply  to  him.     (14)  And  14 
she  recognized  the  voice  of  Simon:   and,  in  her 
joy,  she  did  not  open  to  him  the  gate,  but  ran 
back,d  and  told  them:   Lo,  Simon  is  standing  at 
the  gate  of  the  court.     (15)   They  said  to  her :  15 
Thou  art  delirious.^     But  she  maintained  that  it 
was  a  fact.     They  said  to  her:  Perhaps  it  is  his 
ghost.    (16)  And  Simon  was  knocking  at  the  gate;  16 
and  they  went  out,  saw  him,  and  were  astonished. 
(17)  And  he  beckoned  to  them  with  the  hand  to  17 
be  still ;  and  he  went  in,  and  related  to  them  how 
the  Lord  had  released  him  from  the  prison.     And 
he  said  to  them :  Tell  these  things  to  James  and  to 
the  brethren.     And  he  went  out,  and  departed  to 
another  place. — (18)  And  when  it  was  morning,  18 
there  was  a  great  dispute  among  the  soldiers  con- 
cerning Simon,  what  had  bocomeof  him.    (19)  And  19 
Herod,  when  he  sought  him,  and  could  not  find 


ACTS,    XIII. 


239 


him,  arraigned^  the  keepers,  and  sentenced  tbem 
to  die.  And  he  went  from  Judiea,  and  resided  at 
Caesarea. 

20  And  because  he  was  angry  against  the  Tjrians 
and  Sidonians,  they  assembled  and  came  to  him 
in  a  body ;  and  having  persuaded  Blastus,  the 
king's  chamberlain,  they  begged  of  him  that  they 
might  have  peace;  because  the  supplies  of  their 
country  were  derived  from  the  kingdom  of  Herod. 

21  (21)  And  on  a  day  appointed,?  Herod  was  arrayed 
in  royal  apparel,  and  sat  on  a  tribunal,  and  made  a 

22  S23eech  to  the  assembly.  (22)  And  all  the  people 
shouted,  and  said :  These  are  the  utterances^  of  a 

23  God,  and  not  of  a  mortal.  (23)  And,  because  he 
gave  not  the  glory  to  God,  immediately  the  angel 
of  God  smote  him ;  and  he  was  eaten  of  worms, 

24  and  died. — (21)  And  the  gospel  of  God  was  pro- 
■     claimed,  and  made'  progress. 

25  And  Barnabas  and  Saul,  after  they  had  com- 
pleted their  ministration,  returned  from  Jerusalem 
to  Antioch.     And  they  took  with  them  John,  who 

XIII.  was  surnamed  Mark. — (XIII.)  Now  there  were 
in  the  church  at  Antioch,  [several]  prophets  and 
teachers;  Barnabas,  and  Simon  called  Niger,  and 
Lucius  who  Avas  from  the  city  Gyrene,  and  Menaen, 
a  son  of  the  guardians  of  Herod  the  Tetrarch,  and 

2  Saul.  (2)  And  while  they  were  fasting  and  ma- 
king supplication  to  God,  the  Holy  Spirit  said  to 
them :  Separate  to  me  Saul  and  Barnabas,  for  the 

3  work  to  which  I  have  called  them.  (3)  And  after 
they  had  fasted  and  prayed,  they  laid  the  hand  on 

4  them,  and  sent  them  away. — (4)  And  they,  being 
sent  forth  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  went  down  to  Se- 
leucia,  and  from  there  they  went  by  sea  as  far  as 

5  Cyprus.  (5)  And  when  they  entered  the  city  of 
Salamis,  they  announced  the  word  of  our  Lord  in 
the  synagogues  of  the  Jews.      And  John  minis- 

6  tered  to  them,  (6)  And  when  they  had  travelled 
over  the  whole  island  as  far  as  the  city  Paphos 
they  found  a  certain  man,  a  sorcerer,  a  Jew,  who 
was  a  false  prophet,  and  whose  name  was  Bar 

7  Suma.=^  (7)  He  adhered  to  a  wise  man,  who  was 
the  proconsul,  and  was  called  Sergius  Paulus. 
And  the  proconsul  sent  for  Saul  and  Barnabas, 
and  requested  to  hear  from  them  the  word  of  God. 

8  (8)    And  this  sorcerer,    Bar-Sama,    (whose   name 


Sy.  judged. 


s  or,  celebrated. 

^  Sy.  daughters 
of  the  voice. 


Sy.  grew. 


Sy. 


Sy.U 


n  O 


is  interpreted,  Elymas,)  withstood  them;  because 
he  wished  to  divert  the  proconsul  from  the  faith. 
(9)  And  Saul  who  is  called  Paul,  was  filled  with     9 
the  Holy  Spirit;  and  he  looked  upon  him,  (10)  and  10 
said:  0  thou  full  of  all  subtilties,  and  all  mischiefs, 
thou  child  of  the  calumniator,  and  enemy  of  all 
righteousness;  wilt  thou  not  cease  to  pervert  the 
right  ways  of  the  Lord?     (11)  And  now,  the  hand  11 
of  the  Lord  is  upon  thee,  and  thou  shalt  be  blind, 
and  shalt  not  see  the  sun  for  a  time.     And  imme- 
diately there  fell  upon  him  a  mist  and  darkness; 
and  he  went  about,  inquiring  who  would  .take  him 
by  the  hand.     (12)  And  when  the  proconsul  saw  12 
what  occurred,  he  was  astonished;  and  he  believed 
the  doctrine  of  the  Lord. 

And  Paul  and  Barnabas  went  by  sea,  from  the  13 
city  of  Paphos,  and  came  to  Perga,  a  city  of  Pam- 
phylia.     And  John  separated  from  them,  and  went 
away  to  Jerusalem.     (14)  And  they  departed  from  1-L 
Perga,  and  came  to  Antioch,  a  city  of  Pisidia :  and 
they  entered  the  synagogue,  on  the  sabbath  day, 
and  sat  down.     (15)  And  after  the  law  had  been 
read,  and  the  prophets,  the  Elders'^  of  the  syna- 
gogue sent  to  them,  and  said:  Men,  brethren,  if  ye 
have  a  word  of  exhortation,  address  the  people. — 
(16)  And   Paul  arose,  and  waved   his  hand,  and 
said:  Men,  sons  of  Israel,  and  ye  that  fear  God, 
hear  ye.     (17)  The  God  of  this  people  chose  our  17 
fathers,  and  raised  them  up,  and  multiplied  them, 
when  they  resided  in  the  land  of  Egypt;  and,  with 
a  high  arm,  he  brought  them  out  of  it.     (18)  And  18 
he  fed  them  in  the  wilderness  forty  years.    (19)  And  19 
he  extirpated  seven  nations  in  the  land  of  Canaan, 
and    gave    them   their  land    for    an   inheritance. 
(20)  And  for  four  hundred  and  fifty  years  he  gave  20 
them  judges,  until  Samuel  the  prophet,     (21)  And  21 
then  they  asked  for  themselves  a  king:  and  God 
gave  them  Saul  the  son  of  Kish,  a  man  of  the  tribe 
of  Benjamin,  during  forty  years.     (22)  And  he  re- 
moved him,  and  raised  up  to  them  David  as  king : 
and  he  testified  of  him,  and  said:    I  have  found 
David  the  son  of  Jesse,  a  man  after  my  heart :  he 
will  do  all  my  pleasure.     (23)  From  the  seed  of 
this  man,  hath  God   raised  up   to   Israel,  as   he 
promised,  Jesus  a  deliverer.     (2-1)  And,  before  his  24 
advent,  he  sent  John  to  proclaim  tlic  baptism  of 


15 


16 


22 


23 


ACTS,    XIII. 


241 


26 


27 


28 
29 


30 


25  repentance  to  all  the  people  of  Israel.  (25)  And 
while  John  was  fulfilling  his  ministry,  he  said: 
Who,  suppose  ye,  that  I  am?  I  am  not  he.  But 
lo,  he  Cometh  after  me ;  of  whom  I  am  not  worthy 
to  untie  his  shoe-strings. — (26)  Men,  brethren, 
children  of  the  stock  of  Abraham,  and  all  who, 
with  you,  fear  God,  to  you  is  this  word  of  life° 
sent.  (27)  For,  those  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 
and  their  chiefs,  did  not  apprehend  it;  neither 
[did  they  apprehend]  also  the  writings  of  the 
prophets,  which  are  read  every  sabbath  ;  but  they 
condemned  him,  and  fulfilled  all  the  things  writ- 
ten. (28)  And  while  they  found  no  ground  for 
[his]  death,  they  desired  of  Pilate  that  they  might 
kill  him,  (29)  And  when  they  had  fulfilled  all 
that  was  written  concerning  him,  they  took  him 
down  from  the  cross,  and  laid  him  in  a  sepulchre. 
(30)  But  God  raised  him  from  the  dead.     (31)  And 

31  he  was  seen  many  days,  by  them  who  came  up 
with  him  from  Galilee  to  Jerusalem;  and  they  are 

32  now  his  witnesses  to  the  people.  (32)  And  lo,  we 
also  announce  to  you,  that  the  promise,  which  was 

33  made  to  our  fothers,  (33)  lo,  God  hath  fulfilled  it  to 
us  their  children,  in  that  he  raised  up  Jesus ;  as  it 
is  written  in  the  second  psalm :  Thou  art  my  Son ; 

31  this  day  have  I  begotten  thee.  (31)  And  God  hath 
so  raised  him  from  the  dead,  that  he  will  not  return 
again  and  see  corruption ;  as  he  said :  I  will  give 
to  you  the  sure^  grace  of  David.  (35)  And  again 
he  said,  in  another  place :  Thou  hast  not  given  thy 
devout  one  to  see  corruption.  (36)  For  David,  in 
his  generation,  served  the  pleasure  of  God,  and 
went  to  restjC  and  was  added  to  his  fathers,  and 
saw  corruption.  (37)  But  this  person,  whom  God 
raised  up,  did  not  see  corruption.  (38)  Know 
therefore,  brethren,  that  through  this  man  remis- 
sion of  sins  is  proclaimed  to  you.*  (39)  And  every 
one  that  belie veth  in  this  man,  is  made  just^  from 
all  things,  from  which  ye  could  not  be  made  just 

40  by  the  law  of  Moses.  (10)  Beware,  therefore,  lest 
that  come  upon  you,  which  is  written  in  the  proph- 
ets: (11)  Behold,  ye  despisers,  and  wonder,  and 
perish ;  for  I  work  a  work  in  your  days,  which  ye 
will  not  believe,  though  a  man  relate  it  to  you. 

And  when  they  had  gone  from  them,  they  be- 
sought them  to  speak  the  same  things"  to  them  the 


35 


36 


37 
38 

39 


41 


42 


■=  or,  saltation. 


^  or,  faithful. 


or,  fell  asleep. 


Sy.  JDjjllD 


Sy. 

tliese  words. 


242 


ACTS,    XIV. 


''  or,  sakalion. 


i  Sy.      .^n»rr> 


next  sabbath  daj.     (43)  And  when  the  synagogue  43 
was  dismissed,  many  Jews  went  after  them,  and 
likewise  proselytes  who  feared  God.     And  they 
conversed  with  them,  and  persuaded  them  to  ad- 
here to  the  grace  of  God. — (44)  And  the  next  sab-  44 
bath,  the  whole  city  assembled  to  hear  the  word 
of  God,     (45)  And  when  the  Jews  saw  the  great  45 
assembly,  they  were  filled  Avith  envy,  and  set  them- 
selves against  the  words  which  Paul  spoke,  and 
blasphemed.     (46)   And  Paul  and  Barnabas  said,  46 
openly:   To  you  first,  ought  the  word  of  God  to 
be  spoken  ;  but  because  ye  repel  it  from  you,  and 
decide,  against  yourselves,  that  ye  are  not  worthy 
of  life  eternal,  lo,  we  turn  ourselves  to  the  Gen- 
tiles.    (47)  For  so  hath  our  Lord  commanded  us ;  47 
as  it  is  written :    I  have  set  thee  a  light  to  the 
Gentiles ;  that  thou  shouldst  be  for  life'>  unto  the 
ends  of  the  earth.     (48)  And  when  the  Gentiles  48 
heard  [this],  they  rejoiced  and  glorified  God.    And 
those  believed,  who  were  appointed'  to  life  eternal. 
(49)  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  was  talked  of  in  49 
all  that  region. — (50)  But  the  Jews  stirred  up  the  50 
chiefs  of  the  city,  and  the  opulent  Avomen  who 
with  them  feared  God,  and  set  up  a  persecution 
against  Paul  and  against  Barnabas,  and  expelled 
them  from  their  borders.     (51)  And  when  they  51 
went  out,  they  shook  off  the  dust  of  their  feet 
against  them,  and  went  to  the  city  of  Iconium. 
(52)   And  the  disciples  were  filled  with  joy,  and  52 
with  the  lloly  Spirit. 

And  they  came  and  entered  into  the  synagogue  XIY. 
of  the  Jews,  and  so  spoke  with  them,  that  many 
of  the  Jews  and  of  the  Greeks  believed.     (2)  But     2 
Jews    of  the    class    of    unbelievers,   excited   the 
Gentiles,  to  maltreat  the  brethren.     (3)  And  they     3 
continued  there  a   long  time,  and  spoke  openly 
concerning  the  Lord ;  and  he  gave  testimony  to  the 
word  of  his   grace,  by  the    signs    and   prodigies 
which  he  wrought  by  their  hands.     (4)  And  the     4 
whole  multitude  of  the  city  was  divided ;  and  a  part 
were  with  the  Jews,  and  a  part  adhered  to  the 
legates.     (5)  And  an  assault  was  made  on  them,  by     5 
the  Gentiles,  and  by  the  Jews  and  their  chiefs,  to 
insult  them,  and  to  stone  them  with  stones.    (6)  And     6 
when  they  knew  [it],  they  departed  and  fled  to  the 


ACTS,    XIV. 


243 


cities  of  Ljcaonia  and  Lystra  and  Derbe,  and  to  the 

7  villages  around  them ;  (7)  and  there  they  preached. 

8  — (8)  And  a  certain  man  dwelt  in  the  city  Lystra, 
who  was  afflicted  in  his  feet,  a  cripple  from  his 

9  mother's  womb,  who  had  never  walked.     (9)  He 
heard  Paul  speak:  and  when  Paul  saw  him,  and 

10  knew  that  he  had  faith  to  live;!^  (10)  he  said  to 
him,  with  a  loud  voice :  In  the  name  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Messiah,  I  say  to  thee,  Eise  upon  thy  feet. 

11  And  he-  sprang  up,  stood,  and  walked.  (11)  And 
the  assembly  of  people,  when  they  saw  what  Paul 
had  done,  raised  their  voice,  and  said,  in  the  lan- 
guage of  the  country:  The  gods  have  assumed 
the  likeness  of  men,  and  have  come  down  to  us. 

12  (12)  And  they  named  Barnabas  the  Lord  of  the 
Gods;  and  Paul  Hermes, '^  because  he  commenced 

13  the  speaking.  (13)  And  the  priest<^  of  the  Lord  of 
the  Gods,  who  was  without  the  city,  brought  oxen 
and  garlands  to  the  gate  of  the  court  where  they 
lodged,    and  was   disposed   to    offer   sacrilices  to 

14  them. — (14)  But  Barnabas  and  Paul,  when  they 
heard  [it],  rent  their  garments,  and  sprang  and 

15  went  among  the  throng,'!  (15^  am;j  called  out,  and 
said :  Men,  what  do  ye  ?  We  also  are  frail  mortals 
like  yourselves,  who  preach  to  you,  that  ye  should 
turn  from  these  useless  things,  unto  the  living  God, 
who  made  heaven  and  earth  and  seas,  and  what- 

16  ever  is  in  them.     (16)  He,  in  former  ages,  left  all 

17  the  nations  to  go  in  their  own  ways :  (17)  although 
he  did  not  leave  himself  Avithout  testimony,  Avhile 
he  did  them  good  from  heaven,  and  sent  down  the 
rain,  and  made  the  fruits  to  grow  in  their  s&asons, 
and   filled  their  hearts   with   food   and  pleasure. 

18  (18)  And,  by  saying  these  things,  they  with  diffi- 
culty prevented  the  people  from  ofiering  sacrifice 
to  them. 

19  But  Jews  came  hither  from  Iconium  and  An- 
tioch,  and  excited  the  people  against  them.  And 
they  stoned  Paul,  and  dragged  him  out  of  the  city, 

20  supposing  that  he  was  dead.  (20)  And  the  disci- 
ples assembled  around  him ;  and  he  arose,  and  went 
into  the  city. — And  the  next  day,  he  departed  from 
there,  with  Barnabas ;  and  they  came  to  the  city  of 

21  Derbe.  (21)  And  while  they  were  preaching  to 
the  inhabitants  of  that  city,  they  made  many  disci- 
ples.     And  turning  back,  they  came  to  the  city 


or,  65  cured. 


^Sy. 
Gr.  EpfXi^j. 


Sy.  ]-^, 


OD 


i  Sy. 
Gr.  oyXo;. 


244 


ACTS,    XV. 


Sy.  010x0] 
Sy.  ]  ■  1  ■  n 


or,  he  saved. 


^  Sy.  home. 


«  or,  doctrine. 


Sy.  word. 


Lystra,  and  to  Iconium,  and  to  Antioch,  (22)  con-  22 
firming  the  souls  of  tlie  disciples,  and  entreating 
them  to  persevere  in  the  faith  ;  and  they  told  them, 
that  it  was  necessary,  through  much  affliction,  to 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.     (23)  And  they  23 
established^  for  them  Elders^  in  each  church,  while 
they  fasted  with  them,  and  prayed,  and  commended 
them  to  our  Lord  in  whom  they  believed.    (24)  And  24 
when  they  had  travelled  over  the  region  of  Pisidia, 
they  came  to  Pamphylia.      (25)  And  when  they  25 
had  spoken  the  word  of  the  Lord  in  the  city  of 
Perga,    they  went   down   to   Attalia.      (26)   And  2G 
thence  they  proceeded  by  sea,  and  came  to  Anti- 
och ;  because  from  there  they  had  been  commended 
to  the  grace  of  the  Lord,  for  that  work  which  they 
had  accomplished.     (27)  And  when  they  had  col-  27 
lected  together  the  whole  church,  they  narrated  all 
that  God  had  wrought  with  them,  and  that  he  had 
opened  a  door  of  faith  to  the  Gentiles.     (28)  And  28 
they  remained  there  a  long  time  with  the  disciples. 

And  certain  men  came  down  from  Judiea,  and  XA^. 
taught  the  brethren,  that  unless  ye  be  circumcised, 
in  accordance  with  the  rite  of  the  law,  ye  cannot 
have  life.'^    (2)  And  Paul  and  Barnabas  had  much     2 
trouble  and  disputation  with   them.      And  it  re- 
sulted, that  Paul  and  Barnabas,  and  others  with 
them,  went  up  to  the  legates  and  Elders  at  Jerusa- 
lem, because  of  this  matter.     (3)  And  the  church     3 
waited  on  them,  and  sent  them  away ;   and  they 
travelled  through  all  Phenicia  and  the  territory''  of 
the   Samaritans,    narrating   the  conversion  of  the 
Gentiles,  and  causing  great  joy  to  all  the  brethren. 
(4)  And  when  they  came  to  Jerusalem,  they  were     4 
received  by  the  church,  and  by  the  Elders,  and  by 
the  legates ;  and  they  recounted  all  that  God  had 
wrought  by  them,     (5)  And  some  who  from  the     5 
sectc  of  the  Pharisees  had  believed,  rose  up  and 
said :  It  is  necessary  for  you  to  circumcise  them, 
and  to  command  them  to  observe  the  law  of  Moses. 

And  the  legates  and  Elders  assembled,  to  look     6 
into  this  matter. <i     (7)  And  when  there  had  been     7 
much  discussion,  Simon  arose  and  said  to  them: 
Men,  brethren,  ye  know  that,  from  the  earlier  days, 
God  chose  that  from  my  mouth  the  Gentiles  should 
hear  the  word  of  the  gospel,  and  should  believe. 


ACTS,    XV. 


245 


10 


11 


12 


14 


15 


16 


17 


18 
19 

20 


21 


22 


23 


24 


8  (8)  And  God,  who  knowetli  what  is  in  hearts,  bore 
testimony  concerning  them,  and  gave  the   Hol}^ 

9  Spirit  to  them,  even  as  to  us.  (9)  And  he  made  no 
distinction  between  them  and  us ;  because  he  puri- 
fied their  hearts  by  faith.  (10)  And  now,  why 
tempt  ye  God,  by  putting  a  yoke  on  the  necks  of 
the  disciples,  which  neither  our  fathers  nor  we  coukl 
bear?  (11)  But  we  believe,  that  we  as  well  as 
they,  are  to  have  life«  by  the  grace  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Messiah. — (12)  And  the  whole  assembly  were 
silent,  and  listened  to  Paul  and  Barnabas,  who  re- 
lated how  God  by  their  hands  had  wrought  signs 
and  prodigies  among  the  Gentiles.- — (lo)  And  after 
they  ceased, f  James  arose  and  said  :  Men,  brethren, 
hearken  to  me.  (14)  Simon  hath  related  to  you, 
how  God  hath  begun  to  elect  a  people  for  his  name 
from  among  the  Gentiles.  (15)  And  with  this  the 
Avords  of  the  prophets  accord,  as  it  is  written : 
(16)  After  these  things  I  will  return,  and  will  set 
up  the  tabernacle  of  David  that  had  fallen ;  and 
will  build  that  which  was  in  ruins  in  it,  and  will 
raise  it  up :  (17)  so  that  the  residue  of  men  may 
seek  the  Lord,  and  all  the  nations  on  whom  my 
name  is  called;  saith  the  Lord,  who  doth  all  these 
things.  (18)  Known,  from  of  old,  are  the  works  of 
God.  (19)  Therefore  I  say  to  you,  let  them  not 
crush  those  who  from  among  the  Gentiles  have 
turned  unto  God.  (20)  But  let  word  be  sent  to 
them,  that  they  keep  aloof  from  the  defilement  of 
a  sacrifice  [to  idols],  and  from  whoredom,  and  from 
what  is  strangled,  and  from  blood.  (21)  For  in 
every  city,  from  former  ages,  Moses  hath  heralds 
in  the  synagogues,  who  read  him  every  sabbath. 

Then  the  legates  and  Elders,  with  all  the  church, 
chose  men  from  among  themselves,  and  sent  them 
to  Antioch,  with  Paul  and  Barnabas;  [namely], 
Jude,  who  was  called  Barsabas,  and  Silas,?  men 
who  were  chiefs'^  among  the  brethren.  (23)  And 
they  wrote  a  letter  by  them,  thus :  The  legates  and 
Elders  and  brethren,  to  them  that  are  in  Antioch, 
and  in  Syria,  and  in  Cilicia,  brethren  who  are  from 
the  Gentiles,  greeting:'  (24)  We  have  heard,  that 
some  have  gone  from  us  and  disquieted  you,  by 
discourses,  and  have  subverted  3^our  minds,  ^  by 
saying,  That  ye  must  be  circumcised  and  keep  the 
law  ;  things  which  we  have  not  commanded  them. 


*  or,  be  saved. 


•"  Sy.  were  silent. 


f  Sy. 

|]^ 

>.  Sy. 

Wi 

'Sy. 

peace. 

■'or. 

souls. 

246 


ACTS,    XV. 


or,  in  discourse. 


Sy.  AjjD5 


(25)  Therefore  Ave  all  have  thought  fit,  when  assem-  25 
bled,  to  choose  and  send  men  to  jou,  with  our  be- 
loved Paul  and  Barnabas,    (26)    men  who   have  26 
given  up  their  lives  for  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Messiah.     (27)  And  we  have  sent  with  them  Jude  27 
and  Silas,  that  they  may  tell  you  the  same  things 
orally.'    (28)  For  it  was  pleasing  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  28 
and  to  us,  that  there  should  not  be  laid  upon  you 
any   additional    burden,    besides   these   necessary 
things:  (29)  that  ye  keep  aloof  from  a  sacrifice  [to  29 
idols],  and  from  blood,  and  from  what  is  strangled, 
and  from  whoredom.     And  if  ye  keep  yourselves 
from  these,  ye  will  do  Avell.    Be  ye  steadfast  in  the 
Lord. 

And  they  who  were  sent,  came  to  Antioch,  and  30 
assembled  all  the  people,  and  delivered  the  letter. 
(31)  And  when  they  had  read  [it],  they  rejoiced  31 
and  were  comforted.    (32)  And  with  abundant  dis-  32 
course  they  strengthened,  the  brethren  ;    and  the. 
associates'"  of  Jude  and  Silas  established  them,  be- 
cause they  also  were  prophets.     (33)   And  when  33 
they  had  been  there  some  time,  the  brethren  dis- 
missed them  in  peace  to  the  legates.     [(3-1)*  But  it  34 
was  the  pleasu're  of  Silas  to  remain  there.]     (35)  35 
Paul  also  and  Barnabas  remained  at  Antioch ;  and 
they  taught  and  proclaimed,  with  many  others,  the 
word  of  God. 

And  after  [some]  days,  Paul  said  to  Barnabas :  36 
Let  us  return,  and  visit  the  brethren  in  every  city, 
in  which  we  have  preached  the  word  of  God ;  and 
let  us  see  what  they  are  doing.     (37)  And  Barna-  37 
bas  was  disposed  to  take  John,  who  was  surnanied 
Mark.     (38)  But  Paul  was  not  willing  to  take  him  38 
with  them ;  because  he  left  them  when  they  were 
in  Pamphjdia,  and  went  not  with  them.     (39)  In  39 
conscf{uence  of  this  strife,  they  separated  from  each 
other:   and  Barnabas  took  Mark,  and  the}''  trav- 
elled by  sea  and  went  to  Cyprus.     (40)  But  Paul  40 
chose  Silas  for  his  companion,  and  departed,  being 
commended  by  the  brethren  to  the  grace  of  God. 
(41)  And  he  travelled  through  Syria,  and  through  41 
Cilicia,  and  strengthened  the  churches. 


*  This  verse  is  removed  to  the  margin  in  the  editions  of  the  British  and  Foreign 
Bible  Society. 


ACTS,    XVI. 


247 


XVI.  And  he  came  to  tlie  city  Derbe,  and  to  Lystra. 
And  tliere  was  a  certain  disciple  there,  whose  name 
was  Timothy,  the  son  of  a  beUeving  Jewess,  but  his 

2  father  was  a  Gentile. ^^  (2)  And  all  the  disciples  of 
Lystra  and  Iconiuni  gave  good  testimony  of  him. 

3  (3)  Him  Paul  was  disposed  to  take  with  him :  and 
he  took  him,  and  circumcised  him,  because  of  the 
Jews  that  were  in  that  region ;  for  they  all  knew 

4  that  his  father  was  a  Gentile.  (4)  And  as  they 
went  among  the  cities,  they  preached  and  taught 
them,  that  they  should  observe  those  injunctions 
which  the   legates  and  Elders  at  Jerusalem  had 

5  written.  (5)  And  so  were  the  churches^established 
in  the  fiiith,  and  were  increased  in  number  daily. 

6  (6)  And  they  travelled  through  the  regions  of 
Phrygia  and  Galatia ;  and  the  Holy  Spirit  forbid 

7  them  to  speak  the  word  of  God  in  Asia.  (7)  And 
when  they  came  into  the  region  of  Mysia,  they 
were  disposed  to  go  from  there  into  Bithynia,  but 

8  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  permitted  them  not. — (8)  And 
when  they  departed  from  Mysia,  they  came  down 

9  to  the  region  of  Troas.  (9)  And  in  a  vision  of  the 
night,  there  appeared  unto  Paul,  a  man  of  Mace- 
donia, who  stood  and  besought  him,  sayi'ng:  Come 

10  to  Macedonia  and  help  us. — (10)  And  when  Paul 
had  seen  this  vision,  immediately  we  were  desirous 
to  depart  for  Macedonia  ;  because  we  inferred,  that 
our  Lord  called  us  to  preach  to  them. 

11  And  we  sailed  from  Troas,  and  came  direct  to 
Samothrace;  and  from  there,  on  the  following  day, 

12  we  came  to  the  city  Neapolis.  (12)  And  from 
there  to  Philippi,  which  is  the  chiefs  [city]  of 
Macedonia,  and  is  a  colony.     And  we  remained  in 

13  that  city  certain  days.  (13)  And  on  the  sabbath 
day,  we  went  without  the  gate  of  the  city  to  the 
side  of  a  river,  because  a  house  of  prayer  was  seen 
there.     And  when  we  were  seated,  we  conversed 

14  with  the  women  who  there  assembled.  (14)  And 
a  certain  woman  who  feared  God,  a  seller  of  pur- 
ple, whose  name  was  Lydia,  from  the  city  of  Thy- 
atira,   [was  there].     Her  heart  our  Lord  opencc 

15  and  she  hearkened  to  what  Paul  spake.  (15)  And 
she  was  baptized,  and  her  household. ^     And  she 

16  entreated  us,  saying:  If  ye  are  really  persuaded 
that  I  have  believed  in  our  Lord,  come  and  take 
lodging  in  my  house.     And  she  urged  us  much. — 


'  Sy.  "UO'I, 

or,  Aramaean. 


Sy."i.«^5 


248 


ACTS,    XVI. 


•*  Sy.  divined. 


'  or,  salvation. 


'  Sy. 
Gr.  tfrparrjyo; 


8  or,  he  saved. 
^  OT,  be  saved. 


(16)  And  it  occurred  that,  as  we  were  going  to  the  16 
house  of  prayer,  a  certain  maid  met  us,  who  had 

a  spirit  of  divination,  and  who  procured  for  her  lords 
great  gain  by  the  divination  which  she  performed.'' 

(17)  And  she  followed  after  Paul  and  us,  and  cried,  17 
saying:  These  men  are  the  servants  of  the  Most 
nigh  God,  and  they  announce  to  you  the  way  of 
lifee      (18)   And  this  she  did  many  days.     And  18 
Paul  was  indignant ;  and  he  said  to  that  spirit,  I 
command  thee,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Messiah,  that 
thou  come  out  of  her.     And  it  came  out  the  same 
hour.     (19)  And  when  her  lords  saw  that  the  pros-  19 
pect  of  their  gain  from  her  was  gone,  they  seized 
Paul  and  Silas,  and  drao^ging  them  alono^  brouo;ht 
them  to  the  market-place,  (20)  and  set  them  before  20 
the  prefects^  and  chiefs  of  the  city,  and  said  :  These 
men  disturb  our  city;  for  they  are  Jews,  (21)  and  21 
they  preach  to  us  customs,  which  it  is  not  lawful 
for  us  to  receive  and  to  practise,  because  we  are 
Koraans,     (22)  And  a  great  company  was  collected  22 
against  them.     Then  the  prefects  rent  their  gar- 
ments, and  commanded  to  scourge  them.    (23)  And 
when  they  had  scourged  them  much,  they  cast  them 
into  the  prison,  and  commanded  the  keeper  of  the 
prison  to  keep  them  with  care.     (24)  And  he,  hav- 
ing received  this  command,  carried  and  immured 
them  in  the  inner  part  of  the  prison,  and  confined 
their  feet  in  the  stocks.     (25)   And  at  midnight  25 
Paul  and  Silas  were  praying  and  glorifying  God : 
and  the  prisoners  heard  them.    (26)  And  suddenly  26 
there  was  a  great  shaking,  and  the  foundations  of 
the  prison  were  moved ;  and  at  once  all  the  doors 
opened,  and  the  bands  of  all  were  loosed.   (27)  And  27 
when  the  keeper  of  the  prison  awoke,  and  saw  that 
the  doors  of  the  prison  were  open,  he  took  a  sword 
ana  sought  to  kill  himself;  because  he  supposed 
the  prisoners  had  escaped.     (28)  But  Paul  called  28 
to  him,  in  a  loud  voice,  and  said :  Do  thyself  no 
harm,  for  we  are  all  here.     (29)  And  he  lighted  for  29 
himself  a  lamp,  and  sprang  and  came  in,  trembling, 
and  fell  at  the  feet  of  Paul  and  Sihis.     (30)  And  30 
he  brought  them  out,  and  said  to  them  :  My  lords, 
what  must  I  do,  that  I  may  have  life?s     (31)  And  31 
they  said  to  him:  Believe  on  the  name  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Messiah,  and  thou  wilt  have  life,''  thou  and 
thy  house.     (32)  And  they  spoke  the  word  of  the  32 


:>0 


24 


ACTS,    XVII. 


249 


Lord  to  him,  and  to  all  the  members^  of  his  house. 

83  (33)  And  the  same  hour  of  the  night,  he  took  and 
washed  them  from  their  stripes ;  and  he  was  bap- 
tized immediately,  he  and  all  the  members^  of  his 

3-i  house.  (34)  And  he  took  them  and  brought  them 
into  his  house,  and  set  a  table  for  them ;  and  he  re- 
joiced in  the  faith  of  God,  he  and  all  the  members^ 

35  of  his  house. — (35)  And  when  it  was  morning,  the 
prefects  sent  rod-bearers™  to  say  to  the  superior"  of 

36  the  prison :  Let  those  men  loose.  (36)  And  when 
the  superior  of  the  prison  heard  [it],  he  went  in, 
and  said  the  same  thing"  to  Paul;  [namelj^],  that 
the  prefects  have  sent  [word]  that  ye  be  set  free. 
And  now,    [said  he,]    Go  ye  out,   and  depart  in 

37  peace,  (37)  But  Paul  said  to  him :  They  have 
scourged  us,  unoffending  men,  and  Romans,  before 
all  the  world,  and  have  cast  us  into  prison;  and 
now,  do  they  secretly  let  us  out  ?  No,  surely : 
but  let  them  come  themselves  and  bring  us  out. 

38  (38)  And  the  rod-bearers  went  and  told  to  the  pre- 
fects tlie  words  which  were  told  to  them:  and 
when  they  heard  that   tliey  were   Romans,   they 

39  were  afraid,  (39)  and  came  to  them,  and  entreated 
of  them  that  they  would  come  out,  and  tliat  they 

40  would  leave  the  city.  (40)  And  when  they  came 
out  from  the  prison,  they  entered  the  house  of 
Lydia  ;  and  there  they  saw  the  brethren,  and  com- 
forted them,  and  departed. 

XVII.  And  they  passed  through  the  cities  of  Am- 
phipolis  and  Apollonia,  and  came  to  Thessalonica, 

2  where  was  a  synagogue  of  the  Jews.  (2)  And 
Paul,  as  was  his  custom,  went  in  to  them  ;  and 
during   three   sabbaths  he  discoursed   with    them 

3  from  the  scriptures ;  (3)  expounding  and  showipg, 
that  the  Messiah  was  to  sufter,  and  to  arise  from  the 
dead,  and  that  this  Jesus  whom  I  announce  to  you 

4  is  the  Messiah.  (4)  And  some  of  them  believed, 
and  adhered  to  Paul  and  Silas ;  and  of  those  Greeks 
who  feared  God,  a  great  many ;  and  also  of  noted 

5  women,  not  a  few.  (5)  But  the  Jews  were  indig- 
nant, and  gathered  to  themselves  evil  men  from  the 
market-place  of  the  city,  and  formed  a  great  mob ; 
and  tliey  alarmed  the  city,  and  came  and  assaulted 
the  house  of  Jason,  and  sought  to  draw  them  from 

6  it,  and  to  deliver  them  up  to  the  mob.     (6)  And 


Sy.  sons. 


Sy.  sons. 


Sy.  sons. 

'  i.  e.  liclors. 
Sy.  »!2i3 

or,  iDord. 


250 


ACTS,    XVII. 


Sy.  —.VUj, 


ingenuous. 


^  Sy.  made  bit- 
ter. 


0  Sy.  collector  of 
words. 

<>  Sy.  "jcri^, 

gods. 


when  they  found  them  not  there,  they  drew  Jason 
and  the   brethren  who  were   there,  and  brought 
them  before  the  chiefs  of  the  city,  crying  out : 
These  arc  they  who  have  terrified  all  the  country ; 
and  lo,  they  have  come  hither  also:  (7)  and  this     7 
Jason  is  their  entertainer :  and  they  all  resist  the 
commands  of  Caesar,  saying  that  there  is  another 
king,  one  Jesus.     (8)  And  the  chiefs  of  the  city,     8 
and  all  the  people,  were  alarmed  when  they  heard 
these   things.     (9)  And  they  took   sureties  from     9 
Jason,  and  also  from  the  brethren,  and  then  re- 
leased them. — (10)  And  the  brethren  immediately,  10 
on  the  same  night,  sent  away  Paul  and  Silas  to  the 
city  of  Berea.     And  when  they  came  there,  they 
entered  into  the  synagogue  of  the  Jews.     (11)  For  11 
the  Jews  there  were  more  liberal  *  than  the  Jews 
of  Thessalonica ;  and  they  gladly  heard  the  word 
from  them  daily,  and  searched  from  the  scriptures 
whether  these  things  were  so.     (12)  And  many  of  12 
them,  believed;    and   so   likewise  of  the  Greeks, 
many  men,  and  women  of  note.     (13)  And  when  13 
the  Jews  of  Thessalonica  had  knowledge  that  the 
word  of  God  was  preached  by  Paul  in  the  city  of 
Berea,  they  came  thither  also,  and  they  ceased  not 
to  excite  and  alarm  the  people.      (14)   And  the  1-1 
brethren  sent  away  Paul,  that  he  might  go  down 
to  the  sea.     But  Silas  and  Timothy  abode  in  that 
city. 

And  they  who  conducted  Paul,  went  with  him  15 
to  the  city  of  Athens.  And  when  they  departed 
from  him,  they  received  an  epistle  from  him  to 
Silas  and  Timothy,  that  they  should  come  to  him 
speedily.  (16)  And  while  Paul  was  waiting  [for  16 
them]  at  Athens,  he  was  pained**  in  his  spirit ;  be- 
cause he  saw  that  the  Avhole  city  was  full  of  idols. 

(17)  And  in  the  synagogue  he  spoke  with  the  Jews,  17 
and  with  those  that  feared  God,  and  in  the  mar- 
ket-place with  them  who  daily  assembled   there. 

(18)  And  also  philosophers  of  the  sect  of  Epicure-  18 
ans,  and  others  who  were  called  Stoics,  disputed 
with  him.  And  one  and  another  of  them  said: 
What  doth  this  word-monger <=  mean?  Others 
said :  lie  announceth  foreign  deities  ;<*  because  he 
preached    to    them    Jesus    and    his    resurrection. 

(19)  And  they  took  him  and  brouglit  him  to  the  19 
place  of  judgments  called  Areopagus,  and  said  to 


ACTS,    XVII. 


251 


him :  May  we  know  what  this  new  doctrine  which 

20  thou  preachest .  is  ?  (20)  For  thou  scatterest^  in 
our  ears  strange  words ;    and  we  wish   to  know 

21  what  they  are.  (21)  For  all  the  Athenians  and 
the  foreigners  residing  there,  cared  for  nothing  else 

22  but  to  tell  or  to  hear  something  new. — (22)  And 
as  Paul  stood  in  the  Areopagus,  he  said:  Men, 
Athenians,  I  perceive  that  in  all  things  ye  are  ex- 

23  cessive  in  the  worship  of  demons.  (23)  For,  as  I 
was  rambling  about,  and  viewing  the  temples  of 
your  worship,  I  met  with  an  altar,  on  which  was 
inscribed,  To  the  hidden  God.  Him,  therefore, 
whom  ye  worship  while  ye  know  him  not,   the 

21:  very  same  I  announce  to  you.  (24)  For  the  God 
who  made  the  world  and  all  that  is  in  it,  and  who 
is  Lord  of  heaven  and  of  earth,  dwelleth  not  in 

25  temples  made  with  hands.  (25)  Nor  is  he  minis- 
tered to  by  human  hands,  neither  hath  he  any 
wants ;  for  he  it  is  givetli  life  and  breath  ^  to  every 

26  man.  (26)  x\nd  of  one- blood  hath  he  made  the 
whole  world  of  men,  that  they  might  dwell  on  the 
face  of  all  the  earth :  and  he  hath  separated  the 
seasons  by  his  ordinance ;  and  hath- set  bounds  to 

27  the  residence  of  men  :  (27)  that  they  might  inquire 
and  ^earch  after  God,  and,  by  means  of  his  crea- 
tions, might  find  him;  because  he  is  not  afar  off 

28  from  each  one  of  us :  (28)  for  in  him  it  is  we  live, 
and  move,  and  exist :  as  one  of  your  own  wise  men 

29  hath  said  :  From  him  is  our  descent.  (29)  There- 
fore we,  whose  descent  is  from  God,  ought  not  to 
suppose  that  the  Deity?  hath  the  likeness  of  gold, 
or  silver,  or  stone,  sculptured  by  the  art  and  skill 

30  of  men.  (30)  And  the  times  of  this  error  God  hath 
made  to  pass  away ;  and  at  the  present  time,  he 
commandeth  all  men,  that  each  individual,  in  every 

31  place,  should  repent.  (31)  Because  he  hath  appoint- 
ed a  day,  in  which  he  will  judge  all  the  eartli,  with 
righteousness,  by  the  man  whom  he  hath  designa 
ted :  and  he  turneth  every  man  to  faith  in  him,  in 

32  that  he  raised  him  from  the  dead. — (32)  And  when 
they  heard  of  the  resurrection  from  the  dead,  some 
of  them  ridiculed,  and  others  of  them  said :  At 
another  time,   we  will  hear  thee  on  this  matter. 

33  (33)    And  so  Paul    departed   from   among   them. 

34  (31)  And  some  of  them  adhered  to  him,  and  be 
lieved;  one  of  these  was  Dionysius  from  among 


«  Sy.  sowest. 


^  or,  a  soul. 


Sy-UocnlL 


252 


ACTS,    XVIII. 


'  Sy.  son  of 
their  trade. 


*'  Sy.  the  pro- 
fane. 


"  Gr.  Justus. 

"  Sy.  ^3 
«  Sy.  sons. 


f  Sy. 
Gr.  av^-^ntarlg. 


the  judges  of  Areopagu.s,   and 
Damaris,  and  others  with  them. 


a  woman  named 


6 


And  when  Paul  departed  from  Athens,  he  XVIII. 
went  to  Corinth.     (2)  And  he  found  there  a  man,  a     2 
Jew,  whose  name  Avas  Aquihi,  who  was  from  the  re- 
gion of  Pontus,  and  had  Just  tlicn  arrived  from  the 
country  of  Italj-,  he  and  Priscilla  his  wife,  because 
CLaudius   Ctesar   had   commanded   that   all   Jews 
should  depart  from  Rome.    And  he  went  to  them  ; 
(3)  and,  because  he  was  of'^  their  trade,  he  took     3 
lodgings  with  them,  and  worked  with  them;  for 
by  their  trade  they  were  tent-makers.     (4)  And  he     4 
spoke  in  tlie  synagogue  every  sabbath,  and  persua- 
ded the  Jews  and  Gentiles. "^     (5)  And  when  Silas     5 
and  Timothy  had  come  from  Macedonia,  Paul  was 
impeded  in  discourse,  because  the  Jews  stood  up 
against  him,  and  reviled,  as  he  testified  to  them 
that  Jesus  is  the  Messiah.     (6)  And  he  shook  his 
garments,  and   said   to   them :    Henceforth  I  am 
clean ;  I  betake  myself  to  the  Gentiles.     (7)  And 
he  went  away,  and  entered  into  the  house  of  a  cer- 
tain man  named  Titus, «^  one  who  feared  God,  and 
whose  house  adjoined   the  synagogue.      (8)   And 
Crispus,  the  presidenf^  of  the  synagogue,  believed 
on  our  Lord,  he  and  all  the  members^  of  his  house. 
And  many  Corinthians  gave  ear,  and  believed  in 
God,  and  were  baptized.     (9)  And  the  Lord  said 
to  Paul  in  a  vision:  Fear  not,  but  speak  and  be 
not  silent:  (10)  for  I  am  with  thee,  and  no  one  is  10 
able  to  harm  thee ;    and  I  have  much  people  in 
this  cit}'.     (11)  And  he  resided  in  Corinth  a  3'ear  11 
and   six   months,   and  taught  them  the  word  of 
God. 

And  when  Gallio  was  proconsuK  of  Achaia,  the  12 
Jews  assembled  together  against  Paul ;  and  they 
brought  him  before  the  judgment-seat,  (13)  saying:  13 
This  man  pcrsuadeth  the  people  to  worship  God 
contrary  to  the  law.  (14)  And  when  Paul  re- 
quested that  he  might  open  his  mouth  and  speak, 
Gallio  said  to  the  Jews :  If  your  accusation,  0  Jews, 
related  to  any  wrong  done,  or  any  fraud,  or  base 
act,  I  would  listen  to  you  suitably.  (15)  But  if  the 
contests  are  about  words,  and  about  names,  and 
concerning  your  law,  ye  must  see  to  it  among 
yourselves,  for  I  am  not  disposed  to  be  a  judge  of 


9 


14 


15 


ACTS,    XIX. 


253 


16  such  matters.     (16)    And  he  repelled  them  from 

17  his  judgment-seat.  (17)  And  all  the  Gentiless 
laid  hold  of  Sosthenes  an  Elder^  of  the  synagogue, 
and  smote  him  before  the  judgment-seat.  And 
Gallio  disregarded  these  things. 

18  And  when  Paul  had  been  there  many  days,  he 
bid  adieu  to  the  brethren,  and  departed  by  sea  to 
go  to  Syria.  And  with  him  Avent  Priscilla  and 
Aquila,  when  he  had  shaved  his  head  at  Cenchrea, 

19  because  he  had  vowed  a  vow. — (19)  And  they  came 
to  Ephesus;  and  Paul  entered  the  synagogue,  and 

20  discoursed  with  the  Jews.  (20)  And  they  requested 
him  to  tarry  with  thefti :  but  he  could  not  be  per- 

21  suaded.  (21)  For  he  said:  I  must  certainly  keep 
the  approaching  feast  at   Jerusalem.      But,   if  it 

22  please  God,  I  will  come  again  to  you.  (22)  And 
Aquila  and  Priscilla  he  left  at  Ephesus,  and  he 
himself  proceeded  by  sea  and  came  to  Caesarea. 
And  he  went  up  and  saluted  the  members'  of  the 

23  church,  and  went  on  to  Antioch. — (23)  And  when 
he  had  been  there  some  days,  he  departed,  and 
travelled  from  place  to  place  in  the  regions  of 
Phrygia  and  Galatia,  establishing  all  the  disciples. 

2i  And  a  certain  man  named  Apollos,  a  Jew,  a  na- 
tive of  Alexandria,  who  was  trained  to  eloquence, 
and  well  taught  in  the  scriptures,  came  to  Ephesus. 

25  (25)  He  had  been  instructed  in  the  ways  of  the 
Lord,  and  was  fervent  in  spirit ;  and  he  discoursed 
and  taught  fully  respecting  Jesus,  while  yet  he 

26  knew  nothing  except  the  baptism  of  John.  (26)  And 
he  began  to  speak  boldly  in  the  synagogue.  And 
when  Aquila  and  Priscilla  heard  him,  they  took  him 
to  their  house,  and  fully  showed  him  the  way  of  the 

27  Lord.  (27)  And  when  he  was  disposed  to  go  to 
Achaia,  the  brethren  anticipated  him,  and  wrote 
to  the  disciples  to  receive  him.  And,  by  going, 
through  grace,  he  greatly  assisted  all  them  that  be- 

28  lieved.  (28)  For  he  reasoned  powerfully  against 
the  Jews,  before  the  congregation ;  and  showed 
from  the  scriptures,  respecting  Jesus,  that  he  is  the 
Messiah. 

XIX.     And  while  Apollos  was  at  Corinth,  Paul  trav- 
elled over  the  upper  countries  to  Ephesus.     And 
he  inquired  of  the  disciples  whom  he  found  there, 
2  (2)  Have  ye  received  the  Holy  Spirit,  since  ye  be- 


5  Sy.  the  pro- 
fane. 


Sy- 


254 


ACTS,    XIX. 


Sy. 

Aramaeans, 

Sy.  P1k> 


Sy. 


Sy, 
Sv, 


Inom 


*0> 


Sy. 
Aramaeans. 


licved  ?     They  answered  and  said  to  him :  If  there 
be  a  Holy  Spirit,  it  hath  not  come  to  our  hearing. 

(3)  He  said  to  them :  Into  what  then  were  ye  bap-     3 
tized?     They   say:    Into   the    baptism   of   John. 

(4)  Paul  said  to  them:  John  baptized  the  people     4 
with  the  baptism  of  repentance,  while  he  told  them 

to  believe  in  him  who  was  to  come  after  him,  that 
is,  in  Jesus  the  Messiah.    (5)  And  when  tliey  heard     5 
these  things,  they  were  baptized  in  the  name  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah.     (6)  And  Paul  laid  [his]     6 
kand  on  them;  and  the  Holy  Spirit  came  upon 
them,  and  they  spoke  in  various  tongues,  and  pro- 
phesied.    (7)  And  all  the  persons  were  twelve. —     7 
(8)   And  PaAil   entered   into  the  synagogue,  and     8 
spoke  boldl}^  three  months,  persuading  in  regard  to 
the  kingdom  of  God.     (9)  And  some  of  them  were     9 
hardened,  and  disputatious,  and  reviled  tlie  way  of 
God  before  the  assembl}^  of  the  people!      Then 
Paul  withdrew  himself,  and  separated  the  disciples 
from  them.     And  he  discoursed  with  them  daily 
in  the  school  of  a  man  named  Tyrannus.    (10)  And  10 
this  continued  for  two  years,  until  all  who  resided 
in   [Proconsular]  Asia,  both  Jews  and  "Gentiles,^ 
heard   the   word   of  the'  Lord.      (11)    And    God  11 
wrought  very  great  miracles^  by  the  hand  of  Paul : 
(12)  so  that,  from  the  clothes  on  his  body,  napkins  12 
and  rags  were  carried  and  laid  upon  the  sick,  and 
the  diseases  left  them,  and  demons  also  went  out. 
— (13)   And    moreover  certain   Jews,    who   went  13 
about  exorcising*^  demons,  were  disposed  to  exor- 
cise in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  over  those  who 
had  unclean  spirits,  by  saying:  We  adjure  you,  in 
the  name  of  that  Jesus  whom  Paul  announceth. 
(14)  And  there  were  seven  sons  of  one  Soeva,"!  a  14 
Jew,  and  chief*-'  of  the  priests,  who  did  this.     (15)  15 
And  the  evil  demon  answered  and  said  to  them : 
Jesus  I  well  know,  and  Paul  I  know,  but  as  for 
you,  who  are  ye?      (1(3)  And  the  man  in  whom  IG 
was  the  evil  demon  leaped  upon  them;  and  over- 
powered them,  and  threw  them  down :  and  they 
fled  out  of  the  house  denuded  and  bruised.     (17)  17 
And  this  became  known  to  all  the  Jews  and  Gen- 
tiles, f  who  resided  at  Ephesus.     And  fear  fell  on 
them  all,  and  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah 
was  exalted. — (18)  And  many  of  them  that  be-  18 
lieved,  came  and  narrated  their  faults,  and  confess- 


mP^  . 


ACTS,    XIX. 

19  ed  what  they  had  done.  (19)  And  also  naany  ma- 
gicians collected  their  books,  and  bronght  and 
burned  them  before  every  body :  and  they  compu- 
ted the  cost  of  them,  and  it  amounted  to  fifty  thou- 

20  sand  [pieces]  of  silver.  (20)  And  thus  with  great 
power  was  the  faith  of  (rod  strengthened  and  in- 
creased. 

21  And  when  these  things  had  been  accomplished, 
Paul  purposed  in  his  mind,  to  make  the  circuit  of 
all  Macedonia  and  Achaia,  and  [then]  go  to  Jeru- 
salem.   And  he  said :  After  I  have  gone  thither,  I 

22  must  also  see  Borne.  (22)  And  he  sent  two  per- 
sons, of  those  that  ministered  to  hira,  Timothy  and 
Erastus,?  into  Macedonia;  but  he  himself  remained 

23  for  a  time  in  Asia. — (23)  And  at  that  time  there 
was  great  commotion  respecting  the  way  of  God. 

24  (24)  For  a  certain  silversmith  was  there,  named 
Demetrius,  who  made  silver  shrines  for  Diana,  and 
afforded  great  profits  to  the  artisans'^  of  liis  trade. 

25  (25)  He  assembled  all  the  artisans  of  his  trade, 
and  those  who  labored  with  them,  and  said  to  them : 
Gentlemen,!  ye  know  that  our  gains  are  all  from 

26  this  manufacture.  (26)  And  ye  also  know  and  see, 
that  not  only  the  citizens'^  of  Ephesus,  but  also  the 
mass  of  all  Asia,  this  Paul  hath  persuaded  and  en- 
ticed away,  by  saying,  that  those  are  not  gods, 

27  which  are  made  by  the  hands  of  men.  (27)  And 
not  only  is  this 'occupation  slandered  and  impeded, 
but  also  the  temple  of  the  great  goddess^  Diana  is 
accounted  as  nothing;  and  likewise  the  goddess 
herself  of  all  Asia,  and  whom  all  nations  worship, 

28  is  contemned. — (28)  And  when  they  heard  these 
things  they  were  filled  with  wrath  ;  and  they  cried 
out,  and  said:  Great  is  Diana  of  the  Ephesians. 

29  (29)  And  the  whole  city  was  in  commotion;  and 
they  ran  together,  and  entered  the  theatre.  And 
they  caught,  and  bore  along  with,  them,  Gains  and 
Aristarchus,  men  of  Macedonia,  and  associates  of 

30  Paul.     (30)  And  Paul  was  disposed  to  go  into  the 

31  theatre :  but  the  disciples  restrained  him.  (31)  And 
likewise  the  chiefs"^  of  Asia,  because  they  were  his 
friends,  sent  and  requested  of  him,  that  he  would 
not   expose   himself  by  going   into   the   theatre. 

32  (32)  And  the  multitudes  that  were  in  the  theatre 
were  in  great  confusion,  and  cried,  some  one  thing, 
and  some  another :  and  many  of  them  knew  not 


255 


s  Sy.  Aristus. 


Sy.  sons. 


Sy.  Men. 
■  Sy.  sons. 


Sy.  Uoi:^ 


Sy.  ptjj 


256 


ACTS,   XX. 


"  Sy.  ]«  i3 


Sy.  ]«  •n^-^ 


Sy-U-L 


oo 


B6 
37 


38 


for  wliat  cause  they  had  come  together.  (33)  And  33 
the  Jewish  people  who  were  there,  brought  for- 
ward one  of  their  men,  a  Jew,  named  Alexander. 
And  he,  rising  up,  waved  his  hand,  and  wished  to 
make  a  defence  before  the  people.  (34)  But  they,  3-i 
knowing  him  to  be  a  Jew,  all  cried  out  with  one 
voice,  about  two  hours:  Great  is  Diana  of  the  Ephe- 
sians.  (35)  But  the  chief"  of  the  city  tranquillized 
them,  by  saying :  Men  of  Ephesus,  "What  person 
is  there,  among  men,  who  doth  not  know  the  city 
of  the  Ephesians  to  be  devoted  to  the  worship  of 
the  gTeat  Diana,  and  of  her  image  that  descended 
from  heaven?  (36)  Since  therefore  no  one  can 
gainsay  this,  ye  ought  to  be  tranquil,  and  to  do 
nothing  with  precipitancy.  (37)  For  ye  have 
brought  forward  these  men,  when  they  have  robbed 
no   temples,  and  have  not   reviled  our   goddess. 

(38)  But  if  Demetrius  and  the  men  of  his  trade 
have  a  controversy  with  any  one,  lo,  there  is  a  pro- 
consul in  the  city,  they  are  men  of  dexterity,  let 
them    approach   and   litigate   with    one    another. 

(39)  Or  if  you  desire  any  other  thing,  it  may  be 
determined  in  the  place  assigned  by  law  for  an  as- 
sembly." (40)  Because  too  we  are  now  in  danger 
of  being  accused  as  seditious,  since  we  cannot  give 
a  reason  for  the  meeting  of  this  day,  because  we 
have  assembled  needlessly,  and  been  tumultuous 
without  a  cause.  And  having  said  these  things, 
he  dismissed  the  assembly.? 

And  after  the  tumult  had  subsided,  Paul  called  XX, 
the    disciples    to  him,  and  comforted    them,   and 
kissed  them,  and  departed,  and  went  into  Mace- 
donia.    (2)  And  when  he  had  travelled  over  those     ^ 
regions,  and  had  comforted  them  with  many  dis- 
courses, he  proceeded  to  the  country  of  Greece. 
(3)    And  he  was  there  three  months.      And  the     £ 
Jews  formed  a  plot  against  him,  when  he  was  about 
to  go  to  Syria :  and  he  contemplated  returning  to 
Macedonia.     (4)  And  there  departed  with  him,  as     4 
far  as  Asia,  Sopater  of  the  city  Bcrca,  and  Aristar- 
chus  and  Secundus  who  were  of  Thessalonica,  and 
Gaius  who  was  of  the  city  of  Dcrbe,  and  Timothy 
of  Lystra,  and  of  Asia  Tychicus  and  Trophimus. 
(5)  These  proceeded  on  before  us,  and  waited  for     c 
us  at  Troas.     (6)  And  we  departed  from  Philippi,     t 


40 


ACTS,    XX. 

a  city  of  tlie  Macedonians,  after  the  days  of  unleav- 
ened bread ;  and  proceeded  by  water  and  arrived 
at  Troas  in  five  days,  and  remained  there  seven 

7  days. — (7)  And  on  the  first  day  of  the  week,  when 
we  assembled  to  break  the  eucharist,=i  Paul  dis- 
coursed with  them,  because  he  was  to  depart  the 
next  day  ;  and  he  continued  his  discourse  till  mid- 

8  night.    (8)  And  there  were  many  lamps  burning  in 

9  the  chamber  where  we  were  assembled.  (9)  And 
a  young  man  named  Eutychus  was  sitting  in  a  win- 
dovvT  and  listening.  And  while  Paul  prolonged  his 
discourse,  he  sunk  into  a  deep  sleep;  and,  in  his 
sleep,  he  fell  from  the  third  loft,  and  was  taken  up 

10  as  dead.  (10)  And  Paul  went  down,  and  bent 
over   him   and  embraced  him,  and  said:    Be  not 

11  agitated,  for  his  soul^  is  in  him.  (11)  And  when 
he  had  gone  up,  he  broke  the  bread  and  tasted  [it], 
and  discoursed  until  the  morning  dawned.     And 

12  then  he  departed  to  go  by  land.  (12)  And  they 
brought  the  young  man  alive,  and  rejoiced  over 

13  him  greatly. — (13)  And  we  went  on  board  the  ship, 
and  sailed  to  the  port  of  Thesos;<=  because,  there 
we  were  to  take  in  Paul :  for  so  had  he  bidden  us 

14  when  he  proceeded  on  by  land.  (14)  And  when 
we  had  received  him  at  Thesos,  we  took  him  on 

15  board  ship  and  proceeded  to  Mitylene.  (15)  And 
from  there,  the  next  day,  we  sailed  over  against 
the  island  Chios ;  and  again,  the  next  day  we  ar- 
rived at  Samos,  and  stopped  at  Trogyllium ;  and 

16  on  the  following  day  we  arrived  at  Miletus.  (16)  For 
Paul  had  determined  with  himself  to  pass  by  Eph- 
esus,  lest  he  should  be  delayed  there ;  because  he 
hasted  on,  if  possible,  to  keep  the  day  of  pentecost 
in  Jerusalem. 

17  And  from  Miletus,  he  sent  and  called  the  Elders'^ 

18  of  the  churche  at  Ephesus.  (18)  And  when  they 
had  come  to  him,  he  said  to  them :  Ye  yourselves 
know,  how,  at  all  times,  since  the  first  day  that  I 

19  entered  Asia,  I  have  been  with  you  ;  (19)  laboring 
for  God,  in  great  humility,  ^  and  with  tears,  amid 
the  trials  which  beset  me  from  the  plottings  of 

20  Jews  :  (20)  and  I  shunned  not  that  which  was  ad- 
vantageous to  your  souls,  that  I  might  preach  to 

21  you,  and  teach  in  the  streets  and  in  houses,  (21) 
while  I  testified  to  Jews  and  to  Gentiles, s  as  to 
repentance  towards  God  and  faith  in  our  Lord  Je- 


257 


Sy. 


Sy.  m  o  <yi  1 


<=  Gr.  Assos. 


Sy."U. 


»  •  .O 


Sy.  Ua 


or,  depression. 


Sy. 
Aramaeans. 


258 


ACTS,    XX. 


»■  Sy.  I^.^m 


k  In  the  Nesto 
rian  MSS., 
Messiah. 


sus  Messiah.     (22)  And  now  I  am  bound  in  spirit,  22 
and  I  go  to  Jerusalem ;  and  I  know  not  what  will 
befall  me  there ;  (23)  except  that  the  Holy  Spirit,  23 
in    every  city,  testifieth  to  me  and  saith :    Bonds 
and  afflictions  await  thee.     (24)  But  my  life  is  ac-  2-i 
counted  by  me  as  nothing,  so  that  I  may  but  finish 
my  course,  and  the  ministration  which  I  have  re- 
ceived from  our  Lord  Jesus,  to  bear  testimony  to 
the  gospel^  of  the  grace  of  God.     (25)  And  now,  I  25 
know  that  ye  will  see  my  face  no  more,  all  of  you 
among  whom  I  have  travelled  and  preached  the 
kingdom  of  God.     (26)  I  therefore  protest  to  you,  26 
this  day,  that  I  am  pure  from  the  blood  of  you  all. 
(27)  For  I  have  not  shunned  to  acquaint  you  with  27 
all  the  will  of  God.     (28)  Take  heed  therefore  to  28 
yourselves,  and  to  all  the  flock  over  which  the  Holy     • 
Spirit  hath  established  you  bishops;'*  that  ye  feed 
the  church  of  God,'^  which  he  hath  acquired  by  his 
blood.      (29)   For  I  know,  that  after  I  am  gone,  29 
fierce  wolves  will  come  in  among  you,  and  will 
have  no  mercy  on  the  flock.     (30)  And  also,  from  30 
among  yourselves,  there  will  rise  up  men  speaking 
perverse  things,  that  they  may  turn  away  the  dis- 
ciples to  go  after  them.     (31)  Therefore  be  ye  vigi-  31 
lant ;  and  remember,  that  for  three  years  I  ceased 
not  to  admonish  each  one  of  you,  by  day  and  by 
night,  with  tears.     (32)  And  now  I  commend  you 
to  God,  and  to  the  word  of  his  grace,  which  is  able 
to  build  you  up,  and  to  give  you  an  inheritance 
among  all  the  saints.     (33)  Silver,  or  gold,  or  gar- 
ments, I  have  not  coveted.    (34)  And  ye  yourselves 
know,  that  these  hands  ministered  to  my  wants, 
and  to  them  that  were  with  mo.     (35)  And  I  have 
showed  you  all  things ;  that  thus  it  is  a  duty  to 
labor,  and  to  care  for  the  infirm,  and  to  remember 
the  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus ;    for  he  hath  said, 
That  he  is  more  blessed  who  giveth,  than  he  who 
receiveth. — (36)  And  when  he  had  said  these  things,  36 
he  fell  on  his  knees  and  jn-ayed,  and  all  the  people 
with   him.      (37)   And  there  was  great  weeping  37 
among  them  all.      And  they  embraced  him,  and 
kissed  him.     (38)  And  they  had  the  most  anguish,  38 
because  of  the  word  he  uttered,  that  they  would  see 


32 


33 
34 

35 


*  This  is  the  only  place  in  this  version  of  the  New  Testament  in  which  the 
word  Bishop  occurd. 


ACTS,    XXI. 


259 


his  face  no  more, 
the  ship. 


And  thej  accompanied  him  to 


XXL  And  we  separated  from  them,  and  proceeded  in 
a  straight  course  to  the  island  of  Coos :  and  the  next 
day,  we  reached  Rhodes,  and  from  there  Patara. 

2  (2)  And  we  found  there  a  ship  going  to  Pheincia; 

3  and  we  entered  it,  and  proceeded  on.  (3)  And  we 
came  up  with  the  island  of  Cyprus,  and  leaving  it 
on  the  left  we  came  to  Syria;  and  from  there  we 
went  to  Tyre,  for  there  the  ship  was  to  discharge 

4  her  cargo.  (4)  And,  as  we  found  disciples  there, 
we  tarried  with  them  seven  days  :  and  they,  by  the 

5  Spirit,  told  Paul  not  to  go  to  Jerusalem.  (5)  And 
after  those  days,  we  departed  and  went  on'  [our] 
way  ;  and  they  all  clung  to  us,  they  and  their  wives 
and  their  children,  until  [we  Avere]  without  the 
city ;  and  they  fell  on  their  knees  by  the  seaside, 

6  and  prayed.  (6)  And  we  kissed  one  another  :  and 
we  embarked  in  the  ship,  and  they  returned  to  their 

7  homes. — (7)  And  we  sailed  from  Tyre,  and  arrived 
at  the  city  Acco;=^   and  we  saluted  the  brethren 

8  there,  and  stopped  with  them  one  day.  (8)  And 
the  next  day,  we  departed  and  came  to  Crrsarea ; 
and  we  went  in  and  put  up  in  the  house  of  Philip 

9  the  Evangelist,''  who  was  one  of  the  seven.  (9)  He 
had  four  virgin  daughters,  who  were  prophetesses. 

10  (10)  And  as  we  were  there  many  days,  a  certain 
prophet  came  down  from  Juda?a,  whose  name  was 
Agabus.  (11)  And  he  came  in  to  us,  and  took  the 
girdle  of  Paul's  loins,  and  bound  his  own  feet  and 
hands,  and  said :  Thus  saith  the  Holy  Spirit,  So 
will  the  Jews  in  Jerusalem  bind  the  man,  who 
owns  this  girdle ;  and  they  will  deliver  him  into 
the  hands  of  the  Gentiles.  (12)  And  when  we 
heard  these  words,  we  and  the  residents*^  of  the 
place  begged  of  him,  that  he  would  not  go  to  Jeru- 
salem. (13)  Then  Paul  answered  and  said :  What 
do  ye,  weeping  and  crushing  my  heart?  For  I-am 
prepared,  not  only  to  be  bound,  but  also  to  die  at 
Jerusalem,  for  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah. 
(14)  And  as  he  was  not  to  be  persuaded  by  us,  we 
desisted;  and  we  said:  Let  the  pleasure  of  our 
Lord  take  place. — (15)  And  after  those  days,  we 
prepared  ourselves  and  went  up  to  Jerusalem. 
(IG)  And  some  disciples  of  Ciesarea  went  along 


11 


12 


13 


14 


15 
16 


Sy.  an:., 

Gr.  Plolemais. 


Sy. 


Sy.  sons. 


260 


ACTS,    XXI. 


Sy.\ 


»  »  *  '^ 


«  Sy.  walk  in. 


Sy. 

Aramaeans. 


with  us,  taking  with  them  a  brother  from  among 
the  earlier  disciples,  whose  name  was  Mnason,  and 
who  was  from  Oj^prus  ;  that  he  might  entertain  us 
at  his  house. 

And  when  we  arrived  at  Jerusalem,  the  brethren  17 
received  us  joyfully.     (18)  And  the  next  day,  with  18 
Paul,  we  went  unto  James,  when  all  the  Elders'^ 
were  with  him.     (19)  And  we  gave  them  saluta-  19 
tion  :  and  Paul  narrated  to  them,  with  particularity, 
what  God  had  wrought  among  the  Gentiles  by  his 
ministry.     (20)    And  when  they  heard   [it]   they  20 
glorified  God.    And  they  said  to  him  :  Our  brother. 
Thou  seest  how  many  myriads  there  are  in  Judnea 
who  have  believed  :  and  these  are  all  zealous  for  the 
law.     (21)  And  it  hath  been  told  them,  of  thee,  21 
that  thou  teachest  all  the  Jews  that  are  among  the 
Gentiles   to    depart  from  Moses,  by  telling  them 
not  to  circumcise  their  children,  and  not  to  observe*^ 
the  rites  of  the  law.     (22)  Now,  because  they  have  22 
heard  that  thou  hast  arrived  here,  (23)  do  thou  23 
what  we  tell  thee.     We  have  four  men,  who  have 
vowed  to  purify  themselves.     (24)  Take  them,  and  24 
go  and  purify  thyself  with  them,  and  pay  the  ex- 
penses along  with  them,  as  they  shall  shave  their 
heads  ;  that  every  one  may  know,  that  what  is  said 
against  thee  is  false,  and  that  thou  fulfillest  and  ob- 
servest  the  law,      (25)  As  to  those  of  the  Gentiles  25 
who  have   believed,  Ave   have  written,  that  they 
should  keep  themselves  from  [an  idol's]  sacrifice, 
and  from  whoredom,  and  from  what  is  strangled, 
and  from  blood. — (2(5)  Then  Paul  took  those  men,  26 
on  the  following  da}^,  and  was  purified  with  them; 
and  he  entered  and  went  into  the  temple,  manifest- 
ing to  them  the  completion  of  the  daj'S  of  the  puri- 
fication, up  to  the  presentation  of  the  oifering  by 
each  of  them. 

And  when  the  seventh  day  arrived,  the  Jews  27 
from  Asia  saw  him  in  the  temple :  and  they  exci- 
ted all  the  people  against  him,  and  laid  hands  on 
him,  (28)  crying  out  and  saying :    Men,  sons  of  28 
Israel ;  help.     This  is  the  man,  who  tcacheth  in 
every  j^lace,  against  our  people,  and  against  the 
law,  and   against   this  place ;    and   he   hath  also 
brought  Gentiles^  into  the  temple,  and  hath  pollu- 
ted this  holy  place.     (29)  For  they  had  previously  29 
seen  with  him  in  the  city  Trophimus  the  Ephesian ; 


so 


81 


?.9. 


33 


35 


ACTS,    XXII. 

and  they  supposed,  that  he  had  entered  the  temple 
with  Paul.  (30)  And  the  whole  city  was  in  com- 
motion ;  and  all  the  people  assembled  together, 
and  laid  hold  of  Paul,  and  dragged  him  out  of  the 
temple :  and  instantly  the  gates  were  closed. — 
(31)  And  while  the  multitude  were  seeking  to  kill 
liim,  it  was  reported  to  the  Chiliarch  of  the  cohort,? 
that  the  whole  city  was  in  uproar.  (32)  And  im- 
mediately he  took  a  centurion  and  many  soldiers, 
and  they  ran  upon  them.  And  when  they  saw  the 
Chiliarch  and  the  soldiers,  they  desisted  from  beat- 
ing Paul.  (33)  And  the  Chiliarch  came  up  to  him, 
and  seized  him,  and  ordered  him  to  be  bound  with 
two  chains:  and  he  inquired  respecting  him,  who 
34  he  was,  and  what  he  had  done.  (34)  And  persons 
from  the  throng  vociferated  aorainst  him  this  thing 
and  that.  And,  because  he  could  not,  on  account 
of  their  clamor,  learn  what  the  truth  was,  he  com- 
manded to  conduct  him  to  the  castle.  (35)  And 
when  Paul  came  to  the  stairs,  the  soldiers  bore 
him  along,  because  of  the  violence  of  the  people. 

36  (36)  For  a  great  many  people  followed  after  him, 

37  and  cried  out,  saying:  Away  with  him.  (37)  And 
when  he  came  near  to  entering  the  castle,  Paul  said 
to  the  Chiliarch :  Wilt  thou  permit  me  to  speak 
with  thee  ?  And  he  said  to  him:  Dost  thou  know 
Greek  ?h  (38)  Art  not  thou  that  Egyptian  who, 
before  these  days,  madest  insurrection,  and  leadest 
out  into  the  desert  four  thousand  men,  doers  of 
evil  ?  (39)  Paul  said  to  him  :  I  am  a  Jew,  a  man 
of  Tarsus,  a  noted  city  in  Cilicia,  in  which  I  was 
born  :  T  pray  thee,  suffer  me  to  speak  to  the  people. 

And  when  he  permitted  him,  Paul  stood  upon 

the  stairs,  and  waved  to  them  his  hand  ;  and  when 

they  were  quiet,  he  addressed  them  in  Hebrew,'  and 

XXII.  said  to  them:  (XXII.)  Brethren,  and  fathers, 

2  hearken  to  my  defence  before  you.  (2)  And 
when  they  perceived^^  that  he  addressed  them  in 
Hebrew,  they  were  the  more  quiet :  and  he  said  to 

3  them  :  (3)  I  am  a  man  who  am  a  Jew  ;  and  I  \v'as 
born  in  Tarsus  of  Cilicia,  but  was  brought  up  in 
this  city,  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel,^  and  instructed 
perfectly  in  the  law  of  our  fathers  ;  and  I  was  zeal- 

4  ous  for  God,  as  ye  also  all  are.  (4)  And  I  perse- 
cuted this  way,  even  to  death ;  for  I  bound,  and 
delivered    up  to  prison,   [both]  men  and  women. 


261 


88 


39 


40 


s  Sy.  {.ig^ml, 
Gr.  rf'TTsipa. 


Sy.  A^]jCL. 


Sy.  A^l^ili, 


Sy.  heard. 


bSy. 


262 


ACTS,    XXII. 


S}'.  ]  ti  t  ■  O 


^  Sy.  injliclion 
on  the  head. 


Sy.  .^>V)  i  nl 


f  or,  nations. 


(5)  As  the  liigli  priest  is  my  witness,  and  likewise     5 
all  the  Elders  ;<=  from  whom  I  received  letters,  that 
I  might  go  to  the  brethren  in  Damascus,  and  bring 
those  who  were  there  prisoners  to  Jerusalem,  to 
receive  capital  punishment.''    (6)  And  as  I  travelled     6 
and  began  to  approach  Damascus,  at  noonday,  from 
amidst  tranquillity,  a  great  light  from  heaven  burst 
upon  me.      (7)   And  I  fell  to  the  earth :    and  I     7 
heard  a  voice,  which  said  to  me :  Saul,  Saul !  why 
persecutest  thou  me?     (8)   And  I  answered  and     8 
said:  Who  art  thou,  my  Lord?     And  he  said  to 
me :  I  am  Jesus  the  jSTazarean,  whom  thou  perse- 
cutest.    (9)  And  the  men  who  were  with  me,  saw     9 
the  light,  but  heard  not  t>he  voice  that  talked  with 
me.     (10)  And  I  said:  My  Lord,  what  must  I  do?  10 
And  our  Lord  said  to  me:  Arise,  go  to  Damascus; 
and  there  will  be  told  thee,  all  that  it  is  commanded 
thee  to  do.     (11)  And  as  I  could  see  nothing,  be-  11 
cause  of  the  glory  of  that  light,  those  with  me  took 
me  by  the  hand,  and  I  entered  Damascus.   (12)  And  12 
a  certain  man,  Ananias,  who  was  upright  according 
to  the  law,  as  all  the  Jews  there  testilied  concern- 
ing him,  came  to  me.     (13)  And  he  said  to  me :  13 
My  brother  Saul !  open  thine  eyes.     And  instantly 
my  eyes  were  opened ;    and  I  looked  upon  him. 

(14)  And  he  said  to  me :  The  God  of  our  fathers  1-1 
hath  ordaincdc  thee  to  know  his  will,  and  to  behold 
the  Just  One,  and  to  hear  the  voice  of  his  mouth. 

(15)  And  thou  shalt  be  a  witness  for  him  before  15 
all  men,  concerning  all  that  thou  hast  seen  and 
heard.    (16)  And  now,  why  delay  est  thou?    Arise,  16 
be  baptized,  and  be  cleansed  from  thy  sins,  while 
thou  invokest  his  name. — (17)  And  I  returned  and  17 
came  hither  to  Jerusalem.     And  I  prayed  in  the 
temple.     (18)  And  I  saw  him  in  a  vision,  when  he  18 
said  to  me  :  Make  haste,  and  get  thee  out  of  Jeru- 
salem ;    for   they  will  not   receive  thy  testimony 
concerning  me.     (19)  And  I  said :  My  Lord,  they  19 
well  know  that  I  have  delivered  up  to  prison,  and 
have  scourged  in  all  synagogues,  those  who  believed 

in  thee.     (20)  And  when  tlie  blood  of  thy  martyr  20 
Stephen  was  shed,  I  also  was  standing  with  them, 
and  performed  the  pleasure  of  his  slayers,  and  took 
charge  of  the  garments  of  those  that  stoned  him. 
(21)  But  he  said  to  me:  Depart;  for  I  send  thee  21 
afar,  to  preach  to  the  Gentiles.^ 


ACTS,    XXIII. 


263 


22 


23 


24 


And  wlien  they  had  heard  Paul  as  far  as  this 
sentence,?  they  raised  their  voice,  and  cried  out : 
Away  with  such  a  man  from  the  earth  !  for  he 
ought  not  to  live !  (23)  And  as  they  vociferated, 
and  cast  off  their  garments,  and  threw  dust  into  the 
air,  (24)  the  Chiliarch  gave  orders,  to  carry  him 
into  the  castle  :  and  he  commanded,  that  he  should 
be  examined  with  stripes ;  that  he  might  know,  for 

25  what  cause  they  cried  out  against  him.  (25)  And 
as  they  Avere  stretching  him  with  ropes,^  Paul  said 
to  the  centurion  who  stood  over  him  :  Is  it  lawful 
for  you  to  scourge  a  man,  who  is  a  Roman,'  and 

26  not  yet  found  guilty?  (26)  And  when  the  centu- 
rion heard  [it],  he  went  to  the  Chiliarch,  and  said 
to  him:  What  doest  thou?  For  this  man  is  a 
Roman.  (27)  And  the  Chiliarch  came  to  him,  and 
said  to  him  :  Tell  me ;  Art  thou  a  Roman  ?  And 
he  said  to  him :  Yes.  (28)  The  Chiliarch  replied 
and  said  to  him  :  With  much  money  I  acquired 
Roman  citizenship.^  Paul  said  to  him  :  And  I  was 
born  in  it.  (29)  And  immediately  they  who  were 
intending  to  scourge  him,  fled  from  him :  and  the 
Chiliarch  was  afraid,  when  he  learned  that  he  was 
a  Roman,  because  he  had  stretched  him  [for 
scourging]. 

And  the  next  day,  he  wished  to  know  truly  what 
the  accusation  was,  which  the  Jews  brought  against 
him:  and  he  unbound  him,  and  commanded  the 
chief  priests,  and  the  whole  company  of  their 
head-men,'  to  assemble;  and  he  took  Paul,  and 
brought  him  down,  and  placed  him  among  them. — 
[XXIIL]  And  when  Paul  had  looked  on  the  as- 
sembly of  them,  he  said  :  Men,  my  brethren ;  I 
have  lived  in  all  good  conscience  before  God  up  to 

2  this  day. — (2)  And  Ananias,  the  priest,  commanded 
those  who  stood  by  his  side,  to  smite  Paul  on  the 

3  mouth.  (3)  And  Paul  said  to  him :  God  is  here- 
after to  smite  thee,  [thou]  Whited  Wall !  For,  sittest 
thou  judging  me  agreeably  to  law,  while  thou 
transgressest  the  law,  and  commandest  to  smite 

4  me  ?      (4)  And  those  standing  by,  said  to  him  : 

5  Dost  thou  reproach  the  priest  of  God  !  (5)  Paul 
said  to  them :  I  was  not  aware,  my  brethren,  that 
he  was  the  priest :  for  it  is  written,  Thou  shalt  not 

6  curse  the  ruler^^  of  thy  people. — (6)  And,  as  Paul 
knew  that  a  part  of  the  people  were  of  the  Saddu- 


27 
28 


29 


30 


^  Sy.  zcord. 


*"  or,  thongs. 

'  or,  Roman  cit- 
izen. 


Sy.  Roman- 
ship. 


Sy. 

^(71  »  »  I? 


Sy.  U-5 


264 


ACTS,    XXIII. 


'Sy.  q1D;_»j1o 


Sy.  \ji.  >? 


9 


10 


11 


cees,  and  a  part  of  the  Pharisees,  lie  cried  out,  in 
the  assembly :  Men,  my  brethren  ;  I  am  a  Pharisee, 
the  son  of  a  Pharisee ;  and  for  the  hope  of  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead,  I  am  judged.  (7)  And 
when  he  had  said  this,  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees 
fell  upon  one  another,  and  the  people  were  divided. 
(8)  For  the  Sadducees  say  that  there  is  no  resurrec- 
tion, nor  angels,  nor  a  spirit:  but  the  Pharisees 
confess  all  these.  (9)  And  there  was  great  vocifer- 
ation. And  some  Scribes  of  the  party  of  the  Phar- 
isees rose  up,  and  contended  with  them,  and  said : 
We  have  found  nothing  evil  in  this  man  :  for  if  a 
spirit  or  an  angel  hath  conversed  with  him,  what 
is  there  in  that  ? — (10)  And,  as  there  was  great 
commotion  among  them,  the  Chiliarch  was  afraid 
lest  they  should  tear  Paul  in  pieces.  And  he  sent 
Romans,  to  go  and  pluck  him  from  their  midst,  and 
bring  him  into  the  castle.  (11)  And  when  night 
came,  our  Lord  appeared  to  Paul,  and  said  to  him  : 
Be  strong ;  for  as  thou  hast  testified  of  me  in  Jerusa- 
lem, so  also  art  thou  to  testify  at  Rome. — (12)  And  12 
when  it  was  morning,  several  of  the  Jews  assembled 
together,  and  bound  themselves  by  imprecations,  ^ 
that  they  would  neither  eat  nor  drink  until  they 
had  slain  Paul.  (13)  And  they  who  had  established 
this  compact  by  oath,  were  more  than  forty  persons. 
(14)  And  they  went  to  the  priests  and  Elders,  and  1-1 
said :  We  have  bound  ourselves  by  imprecations, 
that  wc  will  taste  of  nothing,  until  we  shall  have 
slain  Paul.  (15)  And  now,  do  ye  and  the  chiefs'^ 
of  the  congregation  request  of  the  Chiliarch,  that 
he  would  bring  him  unto  you,  as  if  ye  were  desirous 
to  i  n  vestigate  truly  his  conduct :  and  we  are  prepared 
to  sla}'-  him,  ere  he  shall  come  to  you. — (16)  And 
the  son  of  Paul's  sister,  heard  of  this  plot :  and  he 
went  into  the  castle,  and  informed  Paul.  (17) 
And  Paul  sent  and  called  one  of  the  centurions, 
and  said  to  him :  Conduct  this  youth  to  the 
Chiliarch  ;  for  he  hath  something  to  tell  him.  (18) 
And  the  centurion  took  the  young  man,  and 
introduced  him  to  the  Chiliarch,  and  said :  Paul 
the  prisoner  called  me,  and  requested  me  to  bring 
this  youth  to  thee,  for  he  hath  something  to  tell 
thee.  (19)  And  the  Chiliarch  took  the  young  19 
man  by  his  hand,  and  led  him  one  side,  and  asked 
him  :  What  hast  thou  to  tell  me  ?     (20)  And  the 


13 


15 


16 

17 


18 


20 


ACTS,    XXIII. 


265 


young  man  said  to  him :  The  Jews  have  projected 
to  ask  thee  to  bring  down  Paul  to-morrow  to  their 
assembly,   as  if  wishing  to  learn  something  more 

21  from  him.  (21)  But  be  not  thou  persuaded  by 
them :  for,  lo,  more  than  forty  persons  of  them 
watch  for  him  in  ambush,  and  have  bound  them- 
selves by  imprecations,  that  they  will  neither  eat 
nor  drink  until  they  shall  have  slain  him:  and  lo. 
they  are  prepared,  and  are  waiting  for  thy  promise. 

22  (22)  And  th6  Chiliarch  dismissed  the  young  man, 
after  charging  him  :  Let  no  man  know,  that  thou 

23  hast  showed  me  these  things. — (23)  And  he  called 
two  centurions,  and  said  to  them:  Go  and  prepare 
two  hundred  Romans  to  go  to  Cajsarea,  and  sev- 
enty horsemen,  and  shooters  with  the  right  handf^ 
two  hundred  ;  and  let  them  set  out  at  the  third 

2-1  hour  of  the  night.     (24)  And  provide  also  a  saddle 

beast,  that  they  may  set  Paul  on  it,  and  carry  him 

25  safely  to  Felix  the  governor.     (25)    And  he  wrote 

2G  a  letter  and  gave  them,  in  which  was,  thus:    (26) 

Claudius  Lysias  to  the  excellent  governor  Felix; 

27  greeting.  (27)  The  Jews  seized  this  man,  in  order 
to  kill  him ;  but  I  came  with  Romans,  and  rescued 

28  him,  when  I  learned  that  he  was  a  Roman.  (28) 
And  as  I  wished  to  know  the  offence,  for  which  they 
criminated  him,  I  brought  him  to  their  assembly. 

29  (29)  And  I  found,  that  it  was  about  questions  of 
their  law  they  accused  him,  and  that  an  offence 
worthy  of  bonds  or  of  death,  was  not  upon  him. 

80  (30)  And  when  the  wiles  of  a  plot  formed  by  the 
Jews  against  him  came  to  my  knowledge,  I  forth- 
with sent  him  to  thee.  And  I  have  directed  his 
accusers,  to  go  and  contend  with  him,  before  thee. 

31  Farewell. — (31)  Then  the  Romans,  as  tliey  had 
been  commanded,  took  Paul  by  night,  and  brought 

32  him  to  the  city  of  Antipatris.  (32)  And  the  next 
day,  the  horsemen  dismissed  the  footmen  their  as- 

83  sociates,  that  they  might  return  to  the  castle.  (33) 
And  they  brought  him  to  Ca3sarea :  and  they  de- 
livered  the  letter  to  the  governor,  and  set  Paul 

3-1  before  him.  (3-1)  And  when  he  had  read  the 
letter,  he  asked  him  of  what  province  he  was? 

35  And  when  he  learned  that  he  was  of  Cilicia,  (3-4) 
he  said  to  him :  I  will  give  thee  audience,  when  thy 
accusers  arrive.  And  he  ordered  him  to  be  kept 
in  the  Prnetorium  of  Herod. 


or,  javelin 


266 


ACTS,    XXIV. 


»  Sy.  Im^h 

^  or,  doctrine. 


And  after  five  days,  Ananias  the   high     XXIV. 
priest,  with   the   Elders,  and   with  Tertallus  the 
orator,  went  down,  and  made  a  communication  to 
the  governor  against  Paul.       (2)  And  wlien  he     2 
had  been  called,  Tertullus  began  to  accuse  him, 
and  to  say  :    (3)    Through  thee,  we  dwell  in  much     3 
tranquillity ;  and  many  reforms  have  come  to  this 
nation,  under  thy  administration;    and  we  all,  in 
every  place,  receive   thy  grace,   excellent   Felix. 
(4)  But,  not  to  weary  thee  with  numerous  [partic-     4 
ulars],  I  pray  thee   to  hear  our   humbleness,   in 
brief.       (5)    For  we  have  found  this  man  to  be  an     5 
assassin,  and  a  mover  of  sedition  among  all  Jews 
in  the  whole  land :  for  he  is  a  ringleader*  of  the 
sect''  of  the  Nazareans.     (6)  And  he  was  disposed     6 
to  pollute  our  temple.     And  having  seized  him, 
we  wished  to  judge  him  according  to  our  law. 
(7)  Bat  Lj^sias  the  Chiliarch  came,  and  with  great     7 
violence  took  him  out  of  our  hands,  and  sent  him 
to  thee.     (8)  And  he  commanded  his  accusers  to     8 
come  before  thee.      And  if  thou  wilt  interrogate 
him,  thou  canst  learn  from  him  respecting  all  these 
things  of  which   Ave   accuse  him.     (9)  And   the     9 
Jews  also  pleaded  against  him,  saying  that  these 
things  were  so. — (10)    Then  the  governor  made  10 
signs  to  Paul,  that  he  should  speak.     And  Paul 
answered  and  said :  I  know  thee  to  have  been  a 
judge  of  this  nation  for  many  years,  and  I  there- 
fore  cheerfully   enter  upon  a  defence  of  myself. 
(11)  B(^cause   thou   canst   understand,  that  there  11 
have  been  but  twelve  days,  since  I  went  up  to 
Jerusalem  to  worship.      (12)  And  they  did  not  12 
find  me  talking  with  any  person  in  the  temple,  nor 
collecting  any  company,  either  in  their  synagogues, 
or  in  the  city.      (13)    Nor  have  they  the  power  to  13 
prove,  before  thee,  the  things  of  which  they  now 
accuse  me.      (14)    But  this  indeed  I  acknowledge,  14 
that  in  that  same  doctrine  of  which  they  speak,  I 
do  serve  the  God  of  my  fathers,  believing  all  the 
things  written    in   the  law  and   in  the  prophets. 
(15)  And  I  have  a  hope  in  God,  which  they  also  15 
themselves  expect, — that  there  is  to  be  a  resurrec- 
tion of  the  dead,  both  of  the  righteous  and  the 
wicked.     (16)   And  for  this  reason,  I  also  labor  to  16 
have  always  a  pure  conscience  before  God,  and 
before  men.     (17)  And,  after  many  3-ears,  I  came  17 


ACTS,    XXV. 

to  the  people^  of  mj  own  nation,  to  impart  alms/' 

18  and  to  present  an  offering.  (18)  And  "vvhen  I  had 
purified  mj'self,  these  men  found  me  in  the  temple ; 
not  with  a  throng,  nor  with  a  tumult.      But  certain 

19  Jews,  who  came  from  Asia,  were  tumultuous;  (19 
who  ought,  with   me,  to    stand   before   thee,  and 

20  make  acciisation  of  their  own  affair.  (20)  Or  let 
these  here  present  say,  whether  they  found  aTiy 
offence  in  me,  when  I  stood  before  their  assembly; 

21  (21)  except  this  one  thing,^  that  I  cried,  while 
standing  in  the  midst  of  them :  Concerning  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead,  am  I  this  day  on  trial 

22  before  you. — (22)  And  FeHx,  because  he  under- 
stood that  way  fully,  deferred  them,  saying: 
Wiien  the  Chiharch  shall  come,  I  will  give  hearing 

23  between  you.  (23)  And  he  commanded  a  centu- 
rion to  keep  Paul,  at  I'est ;  and  that  no  one  of  his 
acquaintances  should  be  forbidden  to  minister  to 

21  him. — (21)  x\.nd  after  a  few  days,  Fehx,  and  Dru- 
silhi  his  wife  who  was  a  Jewess,  sent  and  called  for 
Paul ;  and  they  heard  him  concerning  faith  in  the 

25  Messiah.  (25)  And  while  he  was  discoursing  with 
them  on  righteousness,  and  on  holiness,  and  on  the 
future  judgment,  Felix  was  filled  with  fear;  and 
he  said :  For  the  present  time,  go :  and  when  I 

26  have  opportunity,  I  will  send  for  thee.  '  (26)  He 
hoped,  moreover,  that  a  present  would  be  given 
him  by  Paul;   [and]  therefore,  he   often    sent   for 

27  him,  and  conversed  with  him. — (27)  And  when 
two  years  were  fulfilled  to  him,  another  governor, 
whose  name  was  Porcius  Festus,  came  into  his 
place.  And  Felix,  that  he  might  do  the  Jews  a 
favor,  left  Paul  a  prisoner. 

XXV.     And  when  Festus  arrived  at  CcBsarea,  he,  after 

2  three  days,,  went  up  to  Jerusalem.  (2)  And  the 
chief  priests  and  the  head  men^^  of  the  Jews  made 

3  representations  to  him  concerning  Paul.  (3)  And 
they  petitioned  him,  asking  of  him  the  favor,  that 
he  would  send  for  him  to  come  to  Jerusalem; 
they  placing  an  ambush  to  slay  him  by  the  way. 

4  (4)  But  Festus  made  answer:  Paul  is  in  custody 

5  at  Ca3sarea,  whither  I  am  in  haste  to  go.  (5)  There- 
fore, let  those  among  you  who  are  able,  go  down 
with  us,  and  make  presentment  of  every  offence 

6  there  is  in  the  man. —  (6)    And  when  he  had  been 


267 


•=  Sy.  sons. 

'  Sy.  IAdjI 


®  Sv.  word. 


Sy.  (  »  >■* 


268 


^  Sy.  give  me  to 
them  as  a  gift. 

'  Sy.  sons  of  his 
counsel. 


^  Sy. 


ACTS,    XXV. 

there  eight  or  ten  days,  he  came  down  to  Caesarea:. 
And  the  next  day,  he  sat  on  the  tribunal,  and  com- 
manded Paul  to  be  brought.      (7)  And  when  he     7 
came,  the  Jews  who  liad  come  from  Jerusalem  sur- 
rounded him,  and  preferred  against  him  many  and 
weighty  charges,  Avhich  they  were  unable  to  sub- 
stantiate.    (8)  Meanwhile  Paul  maintained,  that  he     8 
had  committed  no  offence,  either  against  the  Jew- 
ish law,  or  against  the  temple,  or  against  Ciesar, 
(9)  But  Festus,  because  he  was  disposed  to  con-     9 
ciliate  the  favor  of  the  Jews,  said  to  Paul:  Wilt 
thou  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  and  there  be  tried  before 
me  for  these  things?     (10)  Paul  replied,  and  said:  10 
I  stand  before  Caesar's  tribunal :  here  I  ought  to  be 
tried.     Against  the  Jews  I  have  committed  no  of- 
fence, as  thou  also  well   knowest.     (11)  If  I  had  11 
committed  any  crime,  or  done  any  thing  worthy  of 
death,  I  would  not  refuse  to  die.      But  if  none  of 
the  things  of  which  they  accuse  me,  is  upon  me, 
no  one  may  sacrifice  me  to  their  pleasure.^     I  an- 
nounce  an  appeal   to  Caesar.     (12)  Then   Festus  12 
conferred   with  his  counsellors,*^  *  and    said :  Hast 
thou  declared  an  appeal  to  Casar?     Unto  Caesar, 
shalt  thou  go. 

And  when  [some]  days  had  passed,  Agrippa  the  13 
king,  and  Bernice,  came  down  to  Caesarea  to  salute 
Festus.     (14)  And  when  they  had  been  with  him  14 
[some]  days,  Festus  related  to  the  king  the  case  of 
Paul,  saying:    A  certain  man  was  left  a  prisoner 
by  Felix  :  (15)  And  when  I  was  at  Jerusalem,  the  15 
chief  priests  and  the  Elders  of  the  Jews  informed 
me  respecting  him,  and  desired  that  I  would  pass 
judgment   upon  him  in  their  favor.     (16)  And  I  16 
told  tliem.  It  is  not  the  custom  of  the  Romans,  to 
give  up  a  man  gratuitously  to  be  slain ;  until  his 
accuser  appeareth  and  chargeth  him  to  his  face, 
and,  opportunity  is  afforded  him,  to  make  defence 
respecting  what  is  charged  upon  him,     (17)  And  17 
when  I  had  come  hither,  without  delay,  I  the  next 
day  sat  on  the  tribunal,  and  commanded  the  man 
to  be  brought  before  me.     (18)  And  his  accusers  18 
stood  up  with  him ;  and   they  were  not  able  to 
substantiate  any  criminal  charge  against  him,  as  I 
had  expected;  (19)  but  the}''  had  certain  contro-  19 
versies  with   him    respecting  their  worship, 'i  and 
respecting  one  Jesus,  who  died,  but  who,  as  Paul 


ACTS,    XXVI. 

20  said,  was  alive.  (20)  And  because  I  was  not  well 
established  in  regard  to  these  questions,  I  said  to 
Paul :  Dost  thou  ask  to  go  to  Jerusalem,  and  there 

21  be  judged  concerning  these  matters?  (21)  But  he 
requested  to  be  reserved  for  a  trial  before  Caesar : 
and  I  ordered  him  to  be  kept,  till  I  could  send 

22  him  to.Co3sar. — (22)  And  Agrippa  said:  I  should 
like  to  hear  that  man.     And  Festus  said  :  To-mor- 

23  row  thou  shalt  hear  him.  (23)  And  the  next  day, 
came  Agrippa  and  Bernice,  with  great  pomp,  and 
entered  the  house  of  trials,  with  the  Chiliarchs  and 
chiefs  of  the  city  :    and  Festus  commanded,   and 

24  Paul  came.  (24)  And  Festus  said :  King  Agrippa, 
and  all  persons  present  with  us;  concerning  this 
man  whom  ye  see,  all  the  people  of  the  Jews  ap- 
plied to  me,  at  Jerusalem  and  also  here,  crying 

25  out,  that  he  ought  no  longer  to  live.  (25)  Yet  on 
investigation,  I  found  that  he  hath  done  nothing 
deserving  death.  But,  because  he  requested  to  be 
reserved  for  the  hearing  of  Ccesar,  I  have  ordered 

26  him  to  be  sent.  (26)  And  I  know  not  what  I  can 
write  to  Caesar,  in  regard  to  him :  and  therefore  I 
wished  to  bring  him  before  you,  and  especially 
before  thee,  king  Agrippa  ;  that  when  his  case 
shall  have  been  heard,  I  may  find  what  to  write. 

27  (27)  For  it  is  unsuitable,  when  we  send  up  a  pris- 
oner, not  to  designate  his  offence. 

XXVI.  And  Agrippa  said  to  Paul :  Thou  art  per- 
mitted to  speak  in  thy  own  behalf.  Then  Paul 
extended   his   hand,    and   made   defence,  saying: 

2  (2)  In  regard  to  all  the  things  of  which  I  am  ac- 
cused by  the  Jews,  king  Agrippa,  I  consider  my- 
self highly  favored,  that  I   may   this   day  make 

8  defence  before  thee :  (3)  especially,  as  I  know  thee 
to  be  expert  in  all  the  controversies:'-  anc[  laws  of 
the   Jews.     I  therefore  request  thee  to  hear  me 

4  with  indulgence. — (4)  The  Jews  themselves,  if 
they  would  testify,  know  well  my  course  of  life 
from  my  childhood,  which  from  the  beginning  was 

5  among  my  nation  and  in  Jerusalem.  (5)  For  they 
have  long  been  persuaded  of  me,  and  have  known, 
that  I  lived  in  the  princely''  doctrine'^  of  the  Phari- 

6  sees.  (6)  And  now,  for  the  hope  of  the  promise 
which  was  made  by  God  to  our  fathers,  I'  stand 

7  and   am  judged.     (7)  To   this   hope,  our   twelve 


269 


Gr.  Zv;rT)fjLara. 


Sy.  |i  ■  .? 

or,  sect. 


270 


Sy.  "^uj^rj 


Sy.  XaJlo 


ACTS,    XXVI. 

tribes  hope  to  come,  with  earnest  prayers  by  day 
and    b}^   night:    and    for   this   same   hope,    king 
Agrippa,  I  am   accused   by  the  Jews.     (8)  How     8 
judge  3'e?     Are  we  not  to  believe,  that  God  will 
raise   the   dead? — (9.)  For  I   myself,  at   first,  re-     9 
solved  in  my  own  mind,  that  I, would  perpetrate 
many  adverse  things  against  the  name  of  Jesus 
the  Nazarean.     (10)  Wliich  I  also  did  at  Jerusa-  10 
lem;   and  by  the  authority  I  received  from  the 
chief  priests,  I  cast  many  of  the  saints'^  into  prison  ; 
and  when  they  were  put  to  death  by  them,  I  took 
part  with  those  that  condemned  them.     (11)  And  11 
in  every  synagogue  I  tortured  them,  while  I  press- 
ed them  to  become  revilers  of  the  name  of  Jesus. 
And  in  the  great  wrath,  with  which  I  was  filled 
against  them,  I  also  went  to  other  cities  to  perse- 
cute  them.     (12)  And,  as  I  was   going   for   this  12 
purpose   to  Damascus,  with  the  authority  and   li- 
cense of  the  chief  priests,  (13)  at  mid-day,  on  the  13 
road,  I  saw,  O  kins;,  a  Wuht  exceeding  that  of  the 
sun,  beaming  from  heaven  upon  me,  and  upon  all 
those  with  me.     (14)  And  we  all  fell  to  the  ground;  1-1 
and  I. heard  a  voice,  which  said  to  me,  in  Hebrew: 
Saul,  Saul !  why  persecutest  thou  me  ?     It  will  be 
a  hard  thing  for  thee  to  kick  against  the  goads. 
(15)  And  I  said:    My  Lord,  who  art  thou?    And  15 
our  Lord  said  to  me :    I  am  Jesus  the  Nazarean, 
whom  thou  persecutest.     (10)  And  he  said  to  mc :  IG 
Stand  upon  thy  feet ;  for  I  have  appeared  to  thee, 
for  this  purpose,  to  constitute  thee  a  minister  and 
a  witness  of  this  thy  seeing  me,  and  of  thy  seeing 
me  hereafter.     (17)  And  I  will  deliver  thee  from  17 
the  people  of  the  Jews,  and  from  other  nations ;  to 
whom  I  send  thee,  (18)  to  open  their  eyes;  that  18 
they  may  turn  from  darkness  to  the  light,  and 
from  the  dominion  of  Satan  unto  God ;  and  may 
receive  remission  of  sins,  and  a  portion  with  the 
saints,^  by  fiiith   in   me.      (19)    Wherefore,  king  19 
Agrippa,  I  did  not  contumaciously  withstand  the 
heavenly  vision :  (20)  but  I  preached  from  the  first  20 
to  them  in  Damascus,  and  to  them  in  Jerusalem 
and  in  all  the  villages  of  Judcca;   and  I  preached 
also  to  the  Gentiles,  that  they  should  repent,  and 
should  turn  to  God,  and   should   do   the  works 
suitable  to  repentance.     (21)  And  on  account  of  21 
these  things,  the  Jews  seized  me  in  the  temple,  and 


ACTS,    XXVII. 


271 


22  songbt  to  kill  me.  (22)  But  unto  this  day  God 
bath  helped  me ;  and  lo,  I  stand  and  bear  testi- 
monjj  to  the  small  and  to  the  great;  yet  saying 
nothing  aside  from  Moses  and  the  prophets,  but  the 
very  things  which  they  declared  were  to  take  place: 

23  (23)  [namely,]  that  Messiah  would  suffer,  and  would 
become  the  first  fruits^  of  the  resurrection  from  the 
dead;    and  that  he  would  proclaim  light  to  the 

2-i  jjeople  and  to  the  Gentiles. — (24)  And  when  Paul 
had  extended  his  defence  thus  far,  Festus  cried, 
with  a  loud  voice :  Paul,  thou  art  deranged  :  much 

25  study  hath  deranged  thee,  (25)  Paul  replied  to 
him :   I  am  not  deranged,  excellent  Festus ;    but 

26  speak  words  of  truth  and  rectitude.  (26)  And 
king  Agrippa  is  also  well  acquainted  with  these 
things ;  and  I  therefore  speak  confidently  before 
him,  because  I  suppose  not  one  of  these  things  hath 
escaped  his  knowledge ;  for  they  were  not  done  in 

27  secret.      (27)  King  Agrippa,   believest  thou   the 

28  prophets  ?  I  know  that  thou  believest.  (28)  King 
Agrippa  said  to  him :  Almost,  thou  persuadest  me 

29  to  become  a  Christian.  (29)  And  Paul  said:  I 
would  to  God,  that  not  only  thou,  but  likewise  all 
that  hear  me  this  day,  were  almost,  and  altogether, 

30  as  I  am,  aside  from  these  bonds.  (30)  And  the 
king  rose  up,  and  the  governor,  and  Bernice,  and 

31  those  who  sat  with  them.  (31)  And  when  they 
had  gone  out,  they  conversed  with  one  another,  and 
said :  This  man  hath  done  nothing  worthy  of  death 

32  or  of  bonds.  (32)  And  Agrippa  said  to  Festus: 
The  man  might  be  set  at  liberty,  if  he  had  not  an- 
nounced an  appeal  to  Ctesar. 

XXVII.  And  Festus  commanded,  respecting  him, 
that  he  should  be  sent  to  Italy,  unto  Ca?sar.  And 
he  delivered  Paul,  and  other  prisoners  with  him,  to 
a  certain  man,  a  centurion  of  the  Augustan  cohort, ^^ 

2  whose  name  was  Julius.  (2)  And  when  w^e  were 
to  depart,  we  embarked  in  a  ship  which  was  from 
the  city  of  Adraniyttium,  and  was  going  to  the 
country  of  Asia.  And  there  embarked  with  us  in 
the  ship,  Aristarchus,  a  Macedonian  of  the  city  of 

3  Thessalonica.  (3)  And  the  next  day,  we  arrived  at 
Zidon.  And  the  centurion  treated  Paul  with 
kindness,  and   permitted  him  to  visit  his  friends 

4  and  be  refreshed.     (4)  And  on  sailing  from  there, 


Sy.  ]Ant>  .3 


'^  or,  rcgimeiii. 


272 


ACTS,    XXVII. 


'•i.  e.on  the  10th 
of  Tisri,  or 
Sept.  20th, 


Sy.  Phcenix. 
Sy.  looked. 


*=  Sy.  wind  of 
tempest. 


'  Sy.  hand. 
E  Gr.  Clauda. 


'•  Gr.  a  quick- 
sand. 


because  the  winds  were  against  us,  we  sailed  around 
to  Cyprus.  (5)  And  we  passed  over  the  sea  of 
Gihcia  and  Pamphylia,  and  arrived  at  Myra,  a  city 
of  Lycia. — (6)  And  there  the  centurion  found  a 
ship  of  Alexandria,  which  was  going  to  Italy ; 
and  he  set  us  on  board  of  it.  (7)  And  as  it  was 
hard  navigating,  we  had  scarcely  arrived,  after 
many  days,  over  against  the  isle  of  Cnidos.  And, 
because  the  wind  would  not  allow  us  to  pursue  a 
straight  course,  wc  sailed  around  by  Crete,  [and 
came]  opposite  the  city  of  Salmone.  (8)  And  with 
difficulty,  after  sailing  about  it,  we  arrived  at  a 
place  called  the  Fair  Havens,  near  to  which  was 
the  city  called  Lassa. — (9)  And  we  were  there  a 
long  time,  and  till  after  the  day  of  the  Jewish  fast.*^ 
And  it  was  hazardous  [then]  for  any  one  to  go  by 
sea ;  and  Paul  counselled  them,  (10)  and  said : 
Men,  I  perceive  that  our  voyage  will  be  [attended] 
with  peril,  and  with  much  loss,  not  only  of  the 
cargo  of  our  ship,  but  also  of  our  lives.  (11)  But 
the  centurion  listened  to  the  pilot,  and  to  the 
owner  of  the  ship,  more  than  to  the  words  of  Paul. 
(12)  And,  because  that  harbor  was  not  commodious 
for  wintering  in,  many  of  us  were  desirous  to  sail 
from  it,  and  if  possible,  to  reach  and  to  winter  in  a 
certain  harbor  of  Crete,  which  was  called  Phenice,^ 
and  which  opened'^  towards  the  south. — (13)  And 
when  the  south  wind  breezed  up,  and  they  hoped 
to  arrive  as  they  desired,  we  began  to  sail  around 
Crete.     (14)  And  shortly  after,  a  tempest  of  wind<^ 


10 


11 


12 


14 


arose  upon  us,  called  T}' phonic  Euroclydon.     (15)  15 
And  the  ship  was  whirled  about  by  the  wind,  and 
could  not  keep  head  to  it ;    and  we  resigned  [the 
ship]  to  its  power.f    (16)  And  when  we  had  passed  16 
a  certain  island,  called  Cyra,s  we  could  hardly  re- 
tain  the   boat.     (17)    And   after  hoisting   it    [on  17 
board],  we  girded  the  ship  around  [the  waist],  and 
made  it  strong.     And,  because  we  were  afraid  of 
falling  upon  a  precipice'^  of  the   sea,   we  pulled 
down  the  sail ;    and  so  we  drifted.     (18)  And  as  18 
the  storm  raged  violently  upon  us,  we  the  next 
day  threw  goods  into  the  sea.     (19)  And  on  the  19 
third  day,  with  our  own  hands,  we  threw  away  the 
tackling  of  the  ship.     (20)  And  as  the  storm  held  20 
on  for  many  days,  and  as  no  sun  was  visible,  nor 
moon,   nor  stars,   all  hope  of  our   surviving  was 


ACTS,    XXVII. 


273 


21  wliollj  cut  off. — (21)  And  as  no  one  liad  taken  a 
meal  of  food,  Paul  now  stood  up  in  the  midst  of 
them,  and  said:  If  ye  had  given  heed  to  me,  0 
men,  we  should  not  have  sailed  from  Crete,  and 
we  should  have  been  exempt  from  this  loss  and 

22  peril.  (22)  And  now,  I  counsel  you  to  be  without 
anxiety ;    for  not  a  soul  of  you  will  be  lost,  but 

23  only  the  ship.  (23)  For  there  appeared  to  me 
this  night,  the  angel  of  that  God  whose  I  am,  and 

24  whom  I  serve;'  (24)  and  he  said  to  me:  Fear 
not,  Paul ;  for  thou  art  yet  to  stand  before  Cassar ; 
and,  lo,  God  hath  made  a  gift  to  thee  of  all  them 

25  that  sail  with  thee.  (25)  Therefore,  men,  be  ye 
courageous ;  for  I  confide  in  God,  that  it  will  be  as 

26  was  told  to  me.     (26)  Yet  we  are  to  be  cast  upon 

27  a  certain  island. — (27)  And  after  the  fourteen  days 
of  our  roaming  and  tossing  on  the  Adriatic  sea, 
at  midnight,  the   sailors   conceived  that  they  ap- 

28  proached  land.  (28)  And  they  cast  the  lead,  and 
found  twenty  fathoms.'^    And  again  they  advanced 

29  a  little,  and  they  found  fifteen  fathoms.  (29)  And 
as  we  feared  lest  we  should  be  caught  in  places 
where  were  rocks,  they  cast  four  anchors  from  the 
stern  of  the  ship,  and  prayed  for  the  morning.' — 

30  (30)  And  the  sailors  sought  to  flee  out  of  the  ship. 
And  from  it  they  lowered  down  the  boat  into  the 
sea,  under  pretence  that  they  were  going  in  it  to 

31  make  fast™  the  ship  to  the  land.  (31)  And  when 
Paul  saw  [it],  he  said  to  the  centurion  and  to  the 
soldiers :    Unless  these  remain  in  the  ship,  ye  can- 

32  not  be  saved.     (32)  Then  the  soldiers  cut  the  boat- 

33  rope  from  the  ship,  and  let  the  boat  go  adrift. — (33) 
And  while  it  was  not  yet  morning,  Paul  advised 
them  all  to  take  food,  saying  to  them :  In  conse- 
quence of  the  peril,  it  is  now  the  fourteenth  day 

34  that  ye  have  tasted  nothing.  (34)  Therefore  I 
entreat  you,  to  take  food  for  the  sustenance  of  your 
life ;  for  not  a  hair  from  the  head  of  any  of  you, 

35  will  perish.  (35)  And  having  said  these  things, 
he  took  bread,  and  gave  glory  to  God  before  them 

36  all;  and  he  broke  [it],  and  began  to  eat.  (36) 
And  they  were  all  consoled ;  and  they  took  nourish- 

37  ment.     (37)  And  there  were  of  us  in  the  ship  two 

38  hundred  and  seventy-six  souls.  (38)  And  when 
they  were  satisfied  with  food,  they  lightened  the 
ship,  and  took  the  wheat  and  cast  it  into  the  sea. — 

18 


or,  worship. 


Sy. 


statures, 
i.  e.  of  a  DKin. 


Sy.  day. 


Sy.  to  tie. 


Sy.  high  place. 
Sy.  deeps. 


P  Sy.  I^.kJ^ 

g"ii'e  ///e  to. 


Now,  Malta. 


^  Sy.  w/tic/i  z^fls. 


Sy.  "U-^J 


(89)  And  when  it  was  day,  the  sailors  knew  not  39 
what  land  it  was :  but  they  saw  on  the  margin  of 
the  land  an  inlet  of  the  sea ;  whither,  if  possible, 
they  intended  to  drive  the  ship.     (40)  And   they  40 
cut  away  the  anchors  from  the  ship,  and  left  them 
in  the  sea.      And  they  loosened  the  bands  of  the 
rudder,  and  hoisted  a  small  sail  to  the  breeze,  and 
made  way  towards  the  land.      (41)  And  the  ship  41 
struck  upon  a  shoal"  between  two  chaunelso  of  the 
sea,  and  stuck  fast  upon  it.     And  the  forward  part 
rested  upon  it,  and  was  immovable ;  but  the  after 
part  was  shattered  by  the  violence  of  the  waves. — 
(42)  And  the  soldiers  were  disposed  to  slay  the  42 
prisoners  ;  lest  they  should  resort  to  swimming,  and 
escape  from  them.      (43)  But  the  centurion  kept  43 
them  from  it,  because  he  was  desirous  to  preserve? 
Paul.     And  those  who  were  able  to  swim,  he  com- 
manded to  swim  off  first,  and  pass  to  tlie  land.    (44)  44 
And  the  rest,  he  made  to  transport  themselves  on 
planks,  and  on  other  timbers  of  the  ship.     And  so 
they  all  escaped  safe  to  land. 

And  we  afterwards  learned,  that  the  island  XXYIII. 
was  called  Melita.'^      (2)  And  the  barbarians  who     2 
inhabited  it,  showed  us  many   kindnesses.     And 
they  kindled  a  fire,  and  called  us  all  to  warm  our- 
selves, because  of  the  gTcat  rain  and  cold  at  that 
time.'' — (3)  And  Paul  took  up  a  bundle  of  fagots     3 
and  laid  them  on  the  fire :  and  a  viper,  [driven] 
by  the  heat,  came  out  of  them,  and  bit  his  hand. 
(4)  And  when  the  barbarians  saw  it  hanging  on     4 
his  hand,  they  said :  Doubtless,  this  man  is  a  mur- 
derer; whom,  though  delivered  from  the  sea,  jus- 
tice will  not  suffer  to  live.     (5)  But  Paul  shook     5 
his  hand,  and  threw  the  viper  into  the  fire :  and 
he    received  no    harm.     (6)  And  the    barbarians     6 
expected,  that  he  would  suddenly  swell,  and  fall 
dead  on  the  ground.     And  when  they  had  looked 
a  long  time,  and  saw  that  he  received  no  harm ; 
they  changed  their  language,  and  said,  that  he  was 
a  god. — (7)  And  there  were  lands  in  that  quarter,     7 
belonging  to  a  man  named  Publius,  who  was  the 
chief  mane  of  the  island :  and   he   cheerfully  re- 
ceived us  at  his  house  three  days.     (8)  And  the     8 
father  of  Publius  was  sick  with  a  fever  and  dysen- 
tery.    And  Paul  went  in  to  him,  and  prayed,  and 


ACTS,    XXVIII. 


275 


9 


10 


11 


laid  his  hand  on  him,  and  healed  him.  (9)  And 
after  this  event,  others  also  in  the  island  who  were 
sick,  came  to  him  and  were  healed.  (10)  And 
they  honored  us  with  great  honors :  and  when  we 
left  the  place,  they  supplied  us  with  necessaries. 

And  after  three  months  we  departed,  sailing  in 
a  ship  of  Alexandria,  which  had  wintered  in  the 
island,  and  which  bore  the  signal  of  the  Twins. '^ 

12  (12)  And  we  came  to  the  city  of  Syracuse ;  and 

13  remained  there  three  days,  (13)  And  from  there 
we  made  a  circuit,  and  arrived  at  the  city  Rhegium. 
And,  after  one  day,  the  south  wind  blew  [favor- 
abl}']  for  us,  and  in  two  days  we  came  to  Puteoli, 

14  a  city  of  Italy.  (14)  And  there  we  found  breth- 
ren ;  and  they  invited  us,  and  we  remained  with 
them  seven  days :  and  then  we  proceeded  towards 
Rome.  (15)  And  the  brethren  there,  hearing  [of 
our  approach],  came  out  to  meet  us  as  far  as  the 
village  called  Appii  Forum,  and  as  far  as  the  Three 
Taverns.  And  when  Paul  saw  them,  he  gave 
thanks  to  God,  and  was  encouraged.  (16)  And 
we  went  on  to  Rome.  And  the  centurion  allowed 
Paul  to  reside  where  he  pleased,  with  a  soldier 
who  guarded  him. 

And  after  three  days,  Paul  sent  and  called  for 
the  principal  Jews.  And  when  they  were  assem- 
bled, he  said  to  them :  Men,  my  brethren,  al- 
though I  had  in  nothing  risen  up  against  the 
people  or  the  law  of  my  fathers,  I  was  at  Jeru- 
salem delivered  over    in  bonds   to  the  Romans : 

18  (18)  and  they,  when  they  had  examined  me,  were 
disposed  to    release  me,   because    they  found    in 

19  me  no  offence  deserving  death.  (19)  And,  as  the 
Jews  withstood  me,  I  was  compelled  to  utter  an 
appeal  to  Cassar ;  but  not  because  I  had  any  thing 
of  which   to  accuse    the  people^  of  my  nation. 

20  (20)  For  this  reason  I  sent  for  you  to  come,  that  I 
might  see  you,  and  might  state  these  things  to 
you :  for  it  is  on  account  of  the  hcipe  of  Israel, 
that  I  am  bound  with  this  chain.  (21)  They  said 
to  him :  We  have  received  no  epistle  from  Judoea 
against  thee ;  and  none  of  the  brethren  who  have 
come  from  Jerusalem,  have  told  us  any  evil  thing 
of  thee.  (22)  But  we  are  desirous  to  hear  from 
thee  what  tnou  thinkest;  for  this  doctrine,  we 
know,  is  not  received  by  any  one. — (23)  And  they 


15 


16 


17 


21 


22 


i.  e.  Castor 
and  Pollux. 


"  Sy.  sons. 


276 


ACTS,    XXVIII. 


Sy.  against. 


e  Sy.  made  fat. 


^  Sy. 


appointed  liim  a  day ;  and  many  assembled,  and 
came  to  him  at  his  lodgings.     And  he  explained 
to  them  respecting  the  kingdom  of  God,  testifying 
and  persuading  them  concerning  Jesus,  out  of  the 
law  of  Moses,  and  out  of  the  prophets,  from  morn- 
ing till    evening.      (24)    And   some  of  them    as-  2-i 
sented  to  his  discourses,  and  others  did  not  assent. 
(25)  And  they  went   out  from  him,  disagreeing  25 
among  themselves.      And  Paul  addressed  to  them 
this    speech :     Well  did  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  the 
mouth  of  Isaiah    the   prophet,   speak  couccrningf 
your  fathers,    (26)  saying:    Go  unto  this  people,  26 
and  say  to  them,  Hearing  ye  will  hear,  and  will 
not    understand ;  and  ye   will   see,  and   will  not 
comprehend.    (27)  For  the  heart  of  this  people  is  27 
stupefied,^  and  their  hearing  they  have  made  heavy, 
and  their  eyes  they  have  closed ;   lest  they  should 
see  with  their  eyes,  and   hear  with  their  ears,  and 
understand  with  their    hearts,   and  be  converted 
unto  me,  and  I  should  forgive  them.     (28)  There-  28 
fore,  be  this  known  to  you,  that  to  the  Gentiles  is 
this  redemption^  of  God  sent :  and,  moreover,  they 
will  hear  it.      (29)  And  when  he  had  thus  said,  29 
the  Jews  retired;  and  there  were  great  disputations 
among  them.* 

And  Paul  hired  a  house,  at  his  own  cost,  and  30 
resided  in  it  two  years ;  and  there  he  received  all 
that  came  to  him.     (31)  And  he  preached  concern-  81 
ing  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  taught  boldly  con- 
cerning our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah,  Avithout  hinder- 
ance. 


Completion  of  the  Acts  of  the  blessed  Legates ;  that  is,  their 
Histories. 


*  This  verse  (29)  is  not  in  the  MSS.,  nor  in  any  of  the  earlier  editions :  and 
tlie  later  editions  place  it  in  the  margin. 


The  Epistle  of  Paul  the  Legate,  to  the  Romans. 


L  Paul,  a  servant  of  Jesus  the  Messiah,  called 
and  sent;a-  and  separated  unto  the  gospel''  of  God,  i 

2  — (2)  (which  he  had  before  promised,  by  his  pro- 

3  phets,  in  the  holy  scriptures, — (3)  concerning 
his  Son,  (who  was  born  in  the   flesh, <=  of  seed  of 

4  the  house  of  David,  (i)  and  was  made  known  as 
the  Son  of  God,  by  power, <i  and  by  the  Hoi}'' 
Spirit,)  who  arose  from  the  dead,  Jesus  Messiah, 

5  our  Lord, — (5)  by  whom  we  have  received  grace, 
and  a  mission  among  all  the  Gentiles,  to  the  end 

6  that  they  may  obey  the  faith  in  his  name;  (6) 
among     whom,    ye     also     are    called    by    Jesus 

7  Messiah;) — (7)  to  all  those  who  are  at  Eome, 
beloved  of  God,  called  and  sanctified : — Peace  and 
grace  be  with  you,  from  God  our  Father,  and  from 
our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah. 

8  In  the  first  place,  I  give  thanks  to  God  by  Jesus 
Messiah,    on    account   of  you   all;    because   your 

9  faith  is  heard  of  in  all  the  world,  (9)  And  God, 
whom  in  spirit  I  serve  in  the  gospel  of  his  Son,  is 
my  witness,  that  I  unceasingly  make  mention  of  you, 

10  at  all  times,  in  my  prayers.  (10)  And  I  likewise 
supplicate,  that  hereafter  a  door  may  be  opened  to 
me,  by  the  good  pleasure  of  God,  to  come    unto 

11  you.  (11).  For  I  long  much  to  see  you;  and  to 
impart  to  you  the  gift  of  the  Spirit,  whereby  ye  may 

12  be  established ;  (12)  and  that  we  may  have  com- 
fort together,  in  the  faith  of  both  yourselves  and 

13  me.  (13)  And  I  wish  you  to  know,  my  brethren, 
that  I  have  many  times  desired  to  come  to  you, 
(though  prevented  hitherto,)  that  I  might  have 
some  fruit  among  you  also  ;  even  as  among  other 


»  or,  a  Legate. 
"Sy. 

<=  Sy.  ;mo«^ 

<*  or,  display  of 
power. 


^Q-A.^J0l 


278 


ROMANS,   I. 


*  or,  energy. 
'  or,  salvation. 
8  or,  him. 


=  Sy. 


15 
IG 


17 


18 
19 


20 


21 


Gentiles,  (14)  Greeks  and  barbarians,  the  wise  and  14 
the  unwise :  for  to  every  man  am  I  a  debtor,  to 
preach  [to  him].  (15)  And  so  I  am  eager  to 
preach  to  you  also  who  are  at  Rome.  (16)  For  I 
am  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel ;  for  it  is  the  po\v'er<^ 
of  God  unto  life,''  to  all  who  believe  in  it ;? 
whether  first  they  are  of  the  Jews,  or  whether  they 
arc  of  the  Gentiles,  (17)  For  in  it  is  revealed  the 
righteousness^  of  God,  from  faith  to  faith  ;  as  it  is 
written,  The  righteous  by  faith,  shall  live. 

For  the  wrath  of  God  from  heaven  is  revealed 
against  all  the  iniquity  and  wickedness  of  men, 
who  hold  the  truth  in  iniquity.     (19)  Because  a 
knowledge  of  God  is  manifest  in  them ;  for  God 
hath  manifested   it  in  them.     (20)  For,  from   the 
foundations  of  the  world,  the  occult  things  of  God 
are  seen,  by  the  intellect,"  in  the  things  he  created, 
even  his  eternal  power  and  divinity  ;'^  so  that  they 
might    be    without    excuse;    (21)  because    they 
knew   God,  and   did   not  glorify   him   and   give 
thanks  to  him  as  God,  but  became  vain  in  their 
imaginings,  and  their  unwise  heart  was  darkened. 
(22)  And,  while  they  thought  within  themselves  22 
that  they   were   wise,   they   became   fools.     (23)  23 
And  they  changed  the  glory  of  the  incorruptible 
God  into  a  likeness  to  the  image  of  a  corruptible 
man,  and  into  the  likeness  of  birds  and  quadrupeds 
and  reptiles  on  the  earth. — (24)  For  this  cause,  24 
God   gave    them    up    to  the  lilthy  lusts  of  their 
heart,  to  dishonor  their  bodies  with  them.     (25)  25 
And  they  changed  the  truth  of  God  into  a  lie  ;  and 
worshipped  and  served  the  created  things,  much 
more  than  the  Creator  of  them,  to  whom  belong 
glory   and  blessing,  for  ever  and   ever : 
(26)  For  this  cause,  God  gave  them  up 
passions :  for  their   females   changed   the 
their  natures,  and  employed  that  which  is  unnatu- 
ral.    (27)  And  so  also  their  males  forsook  the  use 
of  females,  which  is  natural,  and  burned  with  lust 
toward  one  another ;  and,  male  with  male,  they  did 
what  is  shameful,  and  received  in  themselves  the 
just  recompense  of  their  error.     (28)  And  as  they  28 
did  not  determine  with  themselves  to  know  God, 
-God  gave  them  over  to  a  vaiti  mind ;  that  they 
might  do  what  they  ought  not,    (29)    being  full  of  29 
all    nii(|uity,    and    lewdness,    and    bitterness,   and 


Amen, 
to  vile 
use  of 


26 


27 


ROMANS,   II. 


279 


malice,  and  covetousness,  and  envy,  and  slaughter, 
80  and  strife,  and  guile,  and  evil  machinations,  (30) 
and  backbiting,  and  slander ;  and  being  haters  of 
God,  scoffers,  proud,  vain-glorious,  devisers  of  evil 
things,  destitute  of  reason,  disregardful  of  parents, 

31  (31)  and  to  whom  a  covenant  is  nothing,  neither 
affection,  nor  peace,  and  in  whom  is  no  compassion. 

32  (32)  These,  while  they  know  the  judgment  of  God, 
that  he  condemneth  those  to  death  who  perpetrate 
such  things,  are  not  only  doers  of  them,  but  the 
companions  of  such  as  do  them. 

IL  There  is  therefore  no  excuse^  for  thee,  0  man, 
that  judgest  thy  neighbor;  for  by  judging  thy 
neighbor,  thou  condemnest  thyself;  for  thou  that 

2  judgest,  dost  practise  the  same  things.  (2)  And 
we  know  that  the  judgment  of  God  is  in  accord- 
ance with  truth, b   in  regard  to  those  Avho  prac- 

3  tise  these  things.  (3)  And  what  thinkest  thou,  O 
man,  that  judgest  those  who  practise  these  things, 
while  practising  them  thyself, — that  thou  wilt  es- 

4  cape  the  judgment  of  God  ?  (-1)  Or  wilt  thou 
abusC^  the  riches  of  his  benevolence,  and  his  long 
suffering,  and  the  opportunity «•  which  he  giveth 
thee  ?  And  dost  thou  not  know,  that  the  benev- 
olence of  God  should  bring  thee  to  repentance? 

5  (5)  Bat,  because  of  the  hardness  of  thy  unrepent- 
ing  heart,  thou  art  treasuring  up  a  store  of  wrath 
against  the  day  of  wrath,  and  against  the  revelation 

6  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God :  (6)  who  will 
recompense  to  every  man,  according  to  his  deeds ; 

7  (7)  to  them  who,  by  perseverance  in  good  works, 
seek  for  glory  and  honor  and  immortality,  to  them 

8  he  will  give  life  eternal ;  (8)  but  to  them  who  are 
obstinate  and  obey  not  the  truth,  but  obey  iniqui 

9  ty,  to  them  he  will  retribute  wrath  and  ire.  (9) 
And  tribulation  and  anguish  [will  be]  to  every 
man  that  doeth  evil ;  to  the  Jews  ffrst,  and  also  to 

10  the  Gentiles:  (10)  but  glory  and  honor  and  peace 
to  every  one  that  doeth  good ;  to  the  Jews  first, 

11  and  also  to  the  Gentiles. — (11)    For  there  is  no  re- 

12  spect  of  persons  with  God  :  (12)  for  those  without 
law,  who  sin,  will  also  perish  without  law  ;  and 
those  under  the  law,  Avho  sin,  will  be  judged  by 

13  the  law, — (13)  (for  not  the  hearers  of  the  law, 
are  riohteous  before  God ;  but  the  doers  of  the 


Sy.  .o  g^V) 


or,  IS  true. 


Sy. 


space. 


280 


ROMANS,   III. 


Sy. 


Sy. 


f  Sy.  IAHo 


^  or, intelligence, 


Sy.  writing. 


law   are  justified;  (14)  for  if  Gentiles  who  have  14 
not  the  law,  shall,  by  their  nature,  ^  do  the  things 
of  the  law  ;  they,  while  without  the  law,  become 
a  law  to  themselves  :  (15)  and  they  show  the  work  15 
of  the  law,  as  it  is  inscribed  on  their  heart ;  and 
their  conscience^  beareth  testimony  to  them,  their 
own    reflections     rebuking    or    vindicating    one 
another,) — (16)    in    the    day  in   which    God    will  16 
judge   the  secret  [actions]  of  men,   as    my    gospel 
[teacheth],  by   Jesus   the   Messiah. — (17)    But   if  17 
thou,  who  art  called  a  Jew,  and   reposest   thyself 
on  the  law,  and   gloriest  in  God,  (18)    that   thou  18 
knowest  his  good  pleasure,  and  discernest  obliga- 
tions,&  because  thou  art  instructed  in  the  law;  (19)  19 
and   hast  confidence   in   thyself,  that   thou  art  a 
guide  to  the  blind,  and  a  light  to  them  who  are  in 
darkness,  (20)  and  an  instructor  of  those  lacking  20 
knowledge,^  and   a  preceptor  to  the  young;  and 
thou    hast   the    appearance  of  knowledge    and  of 
verity   in    the    law: — (21)    Thou   therefore,    who  21 
teachest  others,  teachest  thou  not  thyself?     And 
thou  who  teachest  that  men  must  not  steal,  dost 
thou  steal  ?     (22)  And  thou  who  saycst,  Men  must  22 
not  commit  adultery,  dost  thou  commit  adultery  ? 
And  thou  who  contemnest  idols,  dost  thou  plun- 
der the  sanctuary  ?     (23)  And  thou  who  gloriest  23 
in  the  law,  dost  thou,  by  acting  contrary  to  the 
law,  insult  God  himself?     (24)  For,  the  name  of  24 
God,  as  it  is  written,  is  reviled  among  the  Gentiles 
on  your  account. — (25)  For  circumcision  profiteth,  25 
indeed,  if  thou  fulfillest  the  law :  but  if  thou  de- 
partest  from  the  law,  thy  circumcision  becometh 
uncircumcision.  (26)  And  if  uncircumcision  should  26 
keep  the  precepts  of  the  law,  would  not  that  uncir- 
cumcision  be   accounted    as    circumcision?     (27)  27 
And  the  uncircumcision,  which  from  its  nature  ful- 
filleth  the   law,  will  judge   thee ;  who,  with  the 
scripture,    and    with    circumcision,    transgressest 
against  the  law.     (28)  For  he  is  not  a  Jew,  who  is  28 
so  in  what  is  external :  nor  is  that  circumcision, 
which  is  visible  in  the  flesh,     (29)  But  he  is  a  Jew,  29 
who  is  so  in  what  is  hidden:  and  circumcision  is 
that  of  the  heart,  in  the  spirit,  and  not  in  the  letter,' 
whose  praise  is  not  from  men,  but  from  God. 

What  then  is  the  superiority  of  the  Jew?     Or  III. 


ROMANS,   III. 


281 


2  what  is  the  advantage  of  circumcision  ?  (2)  Much, 
every  way.      And  first,  because  to  them  were  in- 

3  trusted  the  oracles^  of  God.  (3)  For  if  some  of 
them  have  not  believed,  have  they,  by  their  not 
beheving,     made    the    faith    of  God    inefficient  ? 

4  (4)  Far  be  it :  for  God  is  veracious,  and  every  man 
false:  as  it  is  written:  That  thou  mightest  be 
upright,''  in  thy  declarations;  and  be  found  pure, 

5  when  they  judge  thee.  (5)  But  if  our  iniquity 
establish  the  rectitude  of  God,  what  shall  we  say  ? 
Is  God  unrighteous,  when  he  inflicteth  wrath  ?     (I 

6  speak  as  a  man.)     (6)  Far  from.  it.    Otherwise  how 

7  will  God  judge  the  world?  (7)  But  if  the  truth 
of  God  hath  been  furthered  by  my  falsehood,  to 
his  glory  ;  wh}^  am  I  then  condemned  as  a  sinner? 

8  (8)  Or  shall  we  say — as  some  have  slanderously 
reported  us  to  say: — We  will  do  evil  things,  that 
good  [results]  may  come  ? — The  condemnation  of 

9  such  is  reserved  for  justice. — (9)  What  then,  have 
WE  the  superiority,  when  we  have  before  decided 
as  to  both  Jews  and  Gentiles,  that  all  of  them  are 
under  sin  ?  (10)  As  it  is  written :  There  is  none 
righteous  ;  no,  no  one:  (11)  and  none  that  under- 
standeth  ;  nor  that  seeketh  after  God.  (12)  They 
have  all  turned  aside,  together  ;  and  become  repro- 
bates. There  is  none  that  doeth  good  ;  no,  not 
one.  (13)  Their  throats  are  open  sepulchres,  and 
their  tongues  treacherous ;  and  the  venom  of 
the  asp  is  under  their  lips.  (14)  Their  mouth  is 
full  of  cursing  and  bitterness ;  (15)  and  their  feet 
are  swift  to  shed  blood.  (16)  Destruction  and 
anguish  are  in  their  paths:    (17)  and  the  path  of 

18  peacefulness  they  have  not  known :  (18)  and  the 

19  fear  of  God  is  not  before  their  eyes. — (19)  Now 
we  know,  that  whatever  the  law  saith,  it  saith  to 
them  who  are  under  the  law ;  that  every  mouth 
may  be  stopped,  and  all  the  world  be  guilty  before 
God.  (20)  Wherefore,  by  the  deeds  of  the  law, 
no  flesh"  is  justified  before  him:  for,  by  the  law, 
sin  is  known. 

But  now,  the  righteousness<i  of  God  without  the 
law,  is  manifested ;  and  the  law  and  the  prophets 
testify  of  it:  (22)  even  the  righteousness  of  God, 
which  is  by  faith  in  Jesus  Messiah,  for  every  one, 
and  on  eve?y  one,  that  believeth  in  him :  for  there 
is  no  distinction  ;  (23)  for  they   have  all  sinned, 


10 
11 
12 


13 

14 
15 
16 
17 


20 


21 


22 


23 


Sy.  Pib 


Sy.  ^h 


or,  man. 


Sy.  Uqj]d 


282 


ROMANS,    IV. 


'  Sy.  'jj.OJaS) 
e  Sy.  ]  «  mo  ^ . 

''  or,  righteously. 


/«.- 


or,  make  void. 


«  Sy.  orujCi 

'■  Sy.  cuhX 
"  Sy.")ZQ.Q_i5l 


^  Sy.  "IZqjId 


and  failed  of  the  glory  of  God,     (24)  And  they  24 
arc  justified  gratuitously,*^  by  grace,  and  by  the 
redemption^  which  is  in  Jesus  Messiah;  (25)  whom  25 
God  hath  preconstituted  a  propitiation, s  by  faith 
in  his  blood,  because  of  our  sins,  which  we  before 
committed,  (26)   in  the  space  which   God  in  his  26 
long  suffering  gave  to  us,  for  the  manifestation  of 
his  righteousness  at   the    present    time;    that  he 
might  be  righteous,  and  might  with  righteousness^ 
justify  him  who  is  in  the  faith  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Messiah. — (27)    Where  then  is    glorying?     It    is  27 
annihilated. — By  what  law?    by  that  of  works? 
Nay :  but  by  the  law  of  ftiith.     (28)  We  therefore  28 
conclude,  that  it  is  by  faith  a  man  is  justified,  and 
not  by  the  works  of  the  law.      (29)  For,  is  he  the  29 
God  of  the  Jews  only,  and  not  of  the  Gentiles  ? 
Nay :  of  the  Gentiles  also.     (30)  Because  there  is  80 
one  God,  who  justifieth  the  circumcision  by  faith, 
and  the  uncircumcision  by  the  same  faith.    (31)  Do  31 
we  then  nullify^  the  law  of  fliith  ?     Far  be  it.    On 
the  contrary,  we  establish  the  law. 

What  then  shall  we  say  concerning  Abraham  IV. 
the  patriarch,  that  by  the  flesh  he  obtained  ?      (2)     2 
But  if  Abraham  was  justified  by  works,  he  had 
[ground  of]   glorying;  yet  not  before  God.      (3)     3 
For  what  saith  the  scripture?       That  Abraham 
believed  God,  and  it  was   accounted  to  him  for 
righteousness.*      (4)  But  to  him  that  worketh,  the     4 
reward  is  not  reckoned  as  of  grace,  but  as  a  debt 
to  him.     (5)  Whereas,  to  him  that  worketh  not,     5 
but  only  belie veth  in  him  that  justifieth  sinners, 
his  faith  is  accounted  to  him  for  righteousness.'' 
(6)  As  David  also  speaketh  of  the  blessedness  of     6 
the  man,  to  whom  God  reckoneth   righteousnes3<= 
without  works,  (7)  saying :  Blessed  are  they,  whose     7 
iniquity  is  forgiven,  and  whose  sins  are  covered 
up:  (8)  and,  Blessed  is  the  man,  to  whom  God     8 
will    not   reckon  his    sin.     (9)  This    blessedness,     9 
therefore,  is  it  on  the  circumcision  ?  or  on  the  un- 
circumcision ?      For  we  say,  that  Abraham's  f  lith 
was  reckoned  to  him  for  righteousness.     (10)  llow  10 
then  was  it  reckoned  to  liim?     In  circumcision,  or 
in  uncircumcision? — Not  in  circumcision,  but  in 
uncircumcision.    (11)  For  he  received  circumcision,   11 
as  the  sio-ii  and  the  seal  of  the  riffhteousness'i  of  his 


ROMANS,    V. 


28( 


faith  while  in  nncircumcision :  that  he  might  be- 
come the  father  of  all  them  of  the  uncircumcision 
who  believe ;  and  that  it  might  be  reckoned  to  them 

12  also  for  righteousness  :c  (12)  and  the  father  of  the 
circumcision ;  not  to  them  only  who  are  of  the  cir- 
cumcision, but  to  them  also  who  fulfill  the  steps  of 
the  faith  of  our  father  Abraham  in  [his]  uncircum- 

13  cision. — (13)  For  the  promise  to  Abraham  and  to 
his  seed,  that  he  should  become  the  heir  of  the 

'  world,  was  not  by  the  law,  but  by  the  righteousness 

14  of  his  faith.  (14)  For  if  they  who  are  of  the  law  were 
heirs,  faith  would  be  made  void,  and  the  promise 

15  of  no  force.  (15)  For  the  laAV  is  a  worker  of  wrath ; 
because  where  no  law  is,  there  is  no  transgression 

16  of  law.  (16)  Wherefore,  it  is  by  the  faith  which  is 
by  grace,  that  we  are  justified^ :  so  that  the  prom- 
ise may  be  sure  to  all  the  seed ;  not  to  that  only 
which  is  of  the  law,  but  also  to  that  which  is  of 
the  faith  of  Abraham,  who  is  the  father  of  us  all : 

17  (17)  as  it  is  written:  "I  have  constituted  thee  a 
father  to  a  multitude  of  nations ;"  [namely]  before 
God,  in  whom  thou  hast  believed  ;  who  quickeneth 
the  dead,  and  calleth  those  things  which  are  not,  as 

18  if  they  were.  (18)  And  without  hope,  he  confided 
in  the  hope  of  becoming  the  father  of  a  multitude 
of  nations  ;  (as  it  is  written  :  So  will  thy  seed  be.) 

19  (19)  And  he  was  not  sickly  in  his  faith,  while  con- 
templating his  inert?  body,  (for  he  was  a  hundred 

20  years  old,)  and  the  inert^  womb  of  Sarah.  (20) 
And  he  did  not  hesitate  at  the  promise  of  God,  as 
one  lacking  faith  ;  but  he  was  strong  in  fiiith,  and 

21  gave  glory  to  God  ;  (21)  and  felt  assured,  that  what 
God  had  promised  to  him,  he  was  able  to  fulfill. 

22  (22)  And  therefore  it  was  accounted  to  him  for 

23  righteousness. — (23)  And  not  for  his  sake  alone, 
was  it  written,   that  his  faith  was  accounted  for 

24  righteousness  ;  (24)  but  for  our  sakes  also  ;  because 
it  is  to  be  accounted  [so]  to  us,  who  believe  in  him 
that  raised  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah  from  the  dead  ; 

25  (25)  who  was  delivered  up,  on  account  of  our  sins; 
and  arose,  that  he  might  justify'  us. 

V.      Therefore,  because  we  are  justified^  by  faith,  we 

shall  have  peace    with    God,   through    our  Lord 

2  Jesus   Messiah.      (2)  By  whom   we  are  brought 

by  faith  into    this  grace,  in  which  we  stand  and 


Sy.  o  i]^\ 


Sy.  »Oj5p 


s  Sy.  dead. 
Sy.  dead. 


Sy.  ^5]J5 
Sy.  ^jjll 


284 


ROMANS,    V. 


^  or,  it. 

'  Sy.  uAjZ] 

^  or,  be  saved. 


«  Sy.  UcLL5Z 


'  or,  likeness. 
^  Sy.  ")Ai.5Q_» 


"  Sy. 
IZoXliCD 

'  Sy.  QjI^lI 


^  justification, 
or,  acquittal. 


9 


10 


rejoice  in  the  hope  of  the  glory  of  God.  (3)  And 
not  only  so,  but  we  also  rejoice  in  afflictions ; 
because  we  know  that  affliction  pcrfecteth  in  us 
patience ;  (4)  and  patience,  experience  ;  and  expe- 
rience, hope :  (5)  and  hope  maketh  not  ashamed, 
because  the  love  of  God  is  diffused  in  our  hearts, 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  who  is  given  to  us.  (6)  And  if, 
at  this  time,  on  account  of  our  weakness,  Messiah 
died  for  the  ungodly  :  (7) — (for  rarely  doth  one 
die  for  the  ungodly ;  though  for  the  good,  some 
one  perhaps  might  venture  to  die :) — (8)  God  hath 
here  manifested  his  love  towards  us.  Because,  if 
when  we  were  sinners,  Messiah  died  for  us;  (9)  how 
much  more,  shall  we  now  be  justified  by  his  blood, 
and  be  rescued  from  wrath  by  him  '/b  (10)  For 
if  when  we  were  enemies,  God  was  reconciled«=  with 
us  by  the  death  of  his  Son  ;  how  much  more  shall 
we,  in  his  reconciliation,  live*^  by  his  life  ?  (11)  And  11 
not  only  so,  but  we  also  rejoice  in  God,  by  means 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah,  through  whom  we 
have  now  received  the  reconciliation. <= 

As  by  means  of  one  man,  sin  entered  into  the 
world,  and,  by  means  of  sin,  death ;  and  so  death 
passed  upon  all  the  sons  of  men,  inasmuch  as  they 
all  have  sinned  : — (13)  For  until  the  law,  sin,  al- 
though it  was  in  the  world,  was  not  accounted  sin, 
because  there  was  no  law.  (14)  Yet  death  reigned 
from  Adam  until  Moses,  even  over  those  who  had 
not  sinned  after  the  likeness  of  the  transgression 
of  the  command  by  Adam,  who  was  the  type*"  of 
him  that  was  to  come. — (15)  But  not,  as  the  fault,?  15 
so  also  the  free  gift.  For  if,  on  account  of  the  fault 
of  one,  many  died  ;  how  much  more,  will  the  grace 
of  God  and  his  free  gift,  on  account  of  one  man, 
Jesus  Messiah,  abound  unto  m.an}^?  (16)  And 
not,  as  the  offence^^  of  one,  so  also  the  free  gift.  For 
the  judgment,  which  was  of  one  [offence],  was  unto 
condemnation  ;  but  the  free  gift  was,  of  many  sins, 
unto  righteousness.'  (17)  For  if,  on  account  of  the  17 
offence  of  one,  death  reigned ;  still  more,  they  who 
receive  the  abundance  of  the  grace,  and  the  free 
gift,  and  the  righteousness,  will  reign  in  life,  by 
means  of  one,  Jesus  Messiah.  (18)  Therefore,  as 
on  account  of  the  offence  of  one,  condemnation  was 
to  all  men ;  so  on  account  of  the  righteousness  of 
one,  will  the  victory  unto  life''  be  to  all  men.    (19) 


12 


14 


16 


18 


19 


ROMANS,    VI. 


285 


For  as,  on  account  of  the  disobedience  of  one  man, 
many  became  sinners;  so  also,  on  account  of  the 

20  obedience  of  one,  many  become  righteous. — (20) 
And  the  entrance  given  to  the  law,  was  that  sin 
might    increase :    and  where    sin  increased,  there 

21  grace  abounded.  (21)  So  that,  as  sin  had  reigned 
in  death,  so  grace  might  reign  in  righteousness^  unto 
life  eternal,  by  means  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah. 

VI.     What  shall  we  then  say  ?     Shall  we  continue  in 

2  sin,  that  grace  may  abound  ?  (2)  Far  be  it :  for  if 
we  are  persons  that  have  died  to  sin,  how  C£i,n  we 

3  again  live  in  it?  (3)  Or  do  ye  not  know,  that  we 
who  are  baptized  into  Jesus  Messiah,  are  baptized 

4  into  his  death  ?  (-1)  For  we  are  buried  with  him 
in  baptism  unto^^  death ;  that  as  Jesus  Messiah  arose 
from  the  dead  into  the  glory  of  his  Father,  so  also 

5  we,  to  walk  in  a  new  life.  (5)  For  if  we  have  been 
planted  together  with  him  into  the  likeness  of  his 
death,   so   shall  we  be  also  into  his  resurrection. 

6  (6)  For  we  know,  that  our  old  man  is  crucified 
with  him ;  that  the  body  of  sin  might  be  abolished, 

7  and  we  be  no  more  servants  to  sin :  (7)  for  he  that 

8  is  dead  [to  it],  is  emancipated  from  sin.  (8)  If 
then  we  are  dead  with  Messiah,  let  us  believe  that 

9  we  shall  live  with  the  same  Messiah.  (9)  For  we 
know  that  Messiah  rose  from  the  dead,  and  no 
more  dieth  ;  death  hath  no  dominion  over  him. 

10  (10)  For  in  dying,  he  died  for  sin,  once ;  and  in 

11  living,  he  liveth  unto  God.  (11)  So  also  do  ye  ac- 
count yourselves  as  being  dead  to  sin,  and  alive  to 

12  God,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah. — (12)  There- 
fore let  not  sin  reign  in  your  deadP  body,  so  that 

13  ye  obey  its  lusts.  (13)  And  also  give  not  up  your 
members  as  instruments  of  evil  unto  sin,  but  give 
up  yourselves  to  God,  as  those  who  have  been  re- 
suscitated from  the  dead ;  and  let  your  members  be 

14  instruments  for  the  righteousness'^  of  God.  (14) 
And  sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you  ;  for  ye 

15  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace. — (15)  What 
then  ?     Shall  we  sin,  because  we  are  not  under  the 

16  law,  but  under  grace?  Far  be  it.  (16)  Know  ye 
not,  that  to  whomsoever  ye  give  up  yourselves  to 
serve  in  bondage,  his  servants  ye  are,  whom  ye 
serve ;  whether  it  be  to  sin,  or  whether  it  be  to 

17  righteousness,  that  ye  give  ear?     (17)  But  thanks 


Sy.'jZ.Qj'iiirD 


or,'  into. 


''  or,  mortal. 


Sy-UculiA 


286 


ROMANS,    VII. 


or,  in ;  i.  c.  in 
the  spirilual 
body  of  Mes- 
siali. 


or,  ex  died. 


Sy.  wriling. 


be  to  God,  that  3'e  "were  [once]  the  servants  of  sin, 
but  have  [now]  from  the  heart  obeyed  tliat  form  of 
doctruie  to  -which  ye  are  devoted.     (18)  And  when  18 
ye  were  emancipated  from  sin,  ye  became  servants 
to  righteousness.      (19) — (I  speak  as  among  men,  19 
because  of  the  infirmity  of  your  flesh.) — As  ye 
[once]  gave  up  your  members  to  the  servitude  of 
pollution  and  iniquity,  so  also  now  give  ye  up  your 
members  to  the  servitude   of   righteousness   and 
sanctity.     (20)  For  when  ye  were  the  servants  of  20 
sin,    ye    were    emancipated    from    righteousness. 
(21)  And  what  harvest  had  ye  then,  in  that  of  21 
which  3'e  are  now  ashamed  ?    For  the  result  thereof 
is  death.     (22)  And  now,  as  ye  have  been  emanci-  22 
pated  from  sin,  and  have  become  servants  to  God, 
your  fruits  are  holy  ;  and  the  result  thereof  is  life 
everlasting.     (23)  For  the  wages  of  sin  is  death ;  23 
but  the  free  gift  of  God  is  life  eternal,  through  our 
Lord  Jesus  Messiah. 

Or  do  ye  not  know,  my  Brethren, — [for  I  am  ViL 
speaking  to  them  that  know  the  law,] — that  the 
law  hath  dominion  over  a  man,  as  long  as  he  is 
alive?     (2)  Just  as  a  woman,  by  the  law,  is  bound     2 
to  her  husband,  as  long  as  he  is  alive :  but  if  her 
husband  should  die,  she   is  freed  from  the  law  of 
her  husband.      (3)  And  if,  while  her  husbaud  is     3 
alive,  she  should  adhere  to  another  man.  she  would 
become  an  adulteress :  but  if  her  husband  should 
die,  she  is  freed  from  the  law ;  and  would  not  be  an 
adulteress  though  joined  to  another  man.     (4)  And     4 
now,  my  brethren,  ye  also  have  become  dead  to  the 
law,  by^  the  body  of  ]\fessiah ;  that  ye  might  be 
joined  to  another,  [even]  to  him  who  arose  from  the 
dead ;  and  might  yield  fruits  unto  God.     (5)  For     5 
while  we  were  in  the  flesh,  the  emotions  of  sin 
which  are  by  the  law,  were  active''  in  our  members, 
that  we  should  bear  fruits  unto  death.    (6)  But  now     0 
we  are  absolved  from  the  law,  and  arc  dead  to  that 
which  held  us  in  its  grasp ;  that  we  might  henceforth 
serve  in  the  newness  of  the  spirit,  and  not  in  the 
oldness  of  the  letter. <= 

What  shall  we  say  then?     Is  the  law  sin?     Far     7 
be  it.     For  I  had  not  learned  sin,  except  by  means 
of  the  law  :  for  I  had  not  known  concupiscence,  had 
not  the  law  said,  Thou  shalt  not  covet:    (8)  and     8 


ROMANS,    VIII. 


287 


by  this   commandment,   sin   found  occasion,   and 

perfected  in  me  all  concupiscence :  for  without  the 

9  law,  sin  was  dead.     (9)  And  I,  without  the  law,  was 

alive  formerly ;  but  when  the  commandment  came, 

10  sin  became  alive,  and  I  died ;  (10)  and  the  command- 
ment of  life  was  found  by  me  [to  be]  unto  death. 

11  (11)  For  sin,  by  the  occasion  which  it  found  by 
means  of  the   commandment,   seduced   me ;    and 

12  thereby  slew  me.  (12)  Wherefore,  the  law  is  holy ; 
and  the  commandment  is  holy,  and  righteous,  and 

13  good. — (13)  Did  that  which  is  good,  therefore, 
become  death  to  me  ?  Far  be  it.  But  sin,  that  it 
might  be  seen  to  be  sin,  perfected  death  in  me  by 
means  of  that  good  [law] ;  that  sin  might  the  more 
be  condemned,  by  means   of  the  commandment. 

14  (11)  For  we  know,  that  the  law  is  spiritual ;''  but  I  am 

15  carnal,^  and  sold  to  sin.  (15)  For  what  I  am  doing, 
I  know  not :  and  what  I  would,  I  do  not  perform ; 

16  but  what  I  hate,  that  I  do.  (16)  And  if  I  do  what 
I  would  not,  I  testify  of  the  law,  that  it  is  right.f 

17  (17)  And  then,  it  is  no  more  I  who  do  that  thing ; 

18  but  sin,  which  dvvelleth  in  me.  (18)  For  I  know, 
that  in  me,  (that  is,  in  my  flesh,)  good  dwellcth  not: 
because,  to  approve  the  good,  is  easy  for  me ;  but 

19  to  do  it,  I  am  unable.  (19)  For  I  do  not  perform 
the  good,  which  I  would  perform  ;  but  the  bad, 
which  I  would   not  perform,  that  I  do  perform. 

20  (20)  And  if  I  do  what  I  Avould  not,  it  is  not!  that 

21  do  it,  but  sin  which  dwelleth  in  me.  (21)  I  find 
therefore  a  law  coinciding  with  my  conscience," 
which  assentcth  to  my  doing  good,  whereas  evil  is 

22  near  to  me.     (22)  For  I  rejoice  in  the  law  of  God, 

23  in  the  interior  man.  (23)  But  I  see  another  law  in 
my  members,  which  warrcth  against  the  law  of  my 
conscience,  and  maketh  me  a  captive  to  the  law  of 

21  sin  which  existeth  in  my  members.  (24)  0,  a  mis- 
erable man,  am  I!     AVho  will  rescue  me  from  this 

25  body  of  death  ?  (25)  I  thank  God  ;  by  means  of 
our    Lord    Jesus    Messiah    [I    shall  be  rescued.] 

26  (26)  Now,  therefore,  in  my  conscience,^  I  am  a 
servant  of  the  law  of  God;  but  in  my  flesh,  I  am  a 
servant  of  the  law  of  sin. 

VIII.     There  is  therefore  no  condemnation,  to  them 

who,  in  Jesus  Messiah,  walk  not  after  the  flesh. 

2  (2)  For  the  law  of  the  spirit  of  life,  which  is  in 


'  Sy.  of  the 

Spirit. 
-  Sy.  of  the 
flesh. 

'  Sy.  :  «g^ » 


s  or,  reason. 
Sy.  jLJ_ki.5 


or,  reason. 
Sy.  .1  1  iS? 


288 


ROMANS,    VIII. 


Sy.  1ZQj"io 

■  Sy.  .^hdiD 

■  Sy.  IAjAjZ 


^  Sy.  ^4Sd 
'  Sy.  ^^ 


*"  or,  mortal. 


K  or,  conduct. 


^  Sy.  sons. 


'  or,  revealed. 

*  or,  revelation. 

•  Sy.  1^^r:5 


6 


10 


Jesus  Messiah,  liath  emancipated  thee  from  the  law 
of  sin  and  death.  (3)  Inasmuch  as  the  law  was  im- 
potent, by  means  of  the  weakness  of  the  flesh,  God 
sent  his  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  on  account 
of  sin ;  that  He  might,  in  his  flesh,  condemn  sin ; 
(4)  so  that  the  righteousness^^  of  the  law  might  be 
fulfilled  in  us;  since  it  is  not  in  the  flesh  that  we 
walk,  but  in  the  Spirit.  (5)  For  they  who  are  in  tlie 
flesh,  do  mind^  the  things  of  the  flesh :  and  they  who 
are  of  the  Spirit,  do  mind  the  things  of  the  Spirit. 
(6)  For  miudingc  the  things  of  the  flesh,  is  death ; 
but  minding  the  things  of  the  Spirit,  is  life  and 
peace.  (7)  Because  minding  the  things  of  the  flesh, 
is  enmity  towards  God :  for  it  doth  not  subject  it- 
self to  the  law  of  God,  because  it  is  not  possible. 
(8)  And  they  who  are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please 
God. — (9)  Ye,  however,  are  not  in  the  flesh,  but  in 
the  Spirit;  if  the  Spirit  of  God  truly  dwclleth  in  you. 
And  if  in  any  one  there  is  not  the  Spirit  of  Messiah, 
he  is  none  of  his.  (10)  But  if  Messiah  is  in  you, 
the  body  is  dead,  in  regard^^  to  sin ;  and  the  Spirit  is 
alive  in  regard^  to  righteousness.  (11)  And  if  the  11 
Spirit  of  him,  who  raised  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah 
from  the  dead,  dwelleth  in  you ;  he  who  raised  our 
Lord  Jesus  Messiah  from  the  dead,  will  also  vivily 
your  dead^"  bodies,  because  of  his  Spirit  that  dwelleth 
in  you. 

Now  we  are  debtors,  my  Brethren,  not  to  the  12 
flesh,  that  we  should  walk  according  to  the  flesh : — 
(13)  (For  if  ye  live  according  to  the  flesh,  ye  are  to  13 
die.    But  if,  by  the  Spirit,  ye  mortify  the  practices? 
of  the  body,  ye  will  live.     (14)  For  they  who  are  14 
led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  they  are  the  sons  of  God :) — 

(15)  For  ye  have  not  received  the  spirit  of  bondage,  15 
again  to  fear ;  but  ye  have  received  the  Spirit  of 
adoption,  by  which  we  cry,  Father,  our  Father. 

(16)  And  this  Spirit  testifieth  to  our  spirit,  that  we  16 
are  the  sons  of  God.  (17)  And  if  sons,  then  heirs;  17 
heirs  of  God,  and  participators^^  of  the  inheritance 

of  Jesus  Messiah  :  so  that,  if  we  suffer  with  him,  we 
shall  also  be  glorified  with  him. — (18)  For  I  reckon,  18 
that  the  sufferings  of  the  present  time,  are  not  com- 
parable with  the  glory  which  is  to  be  developed' 
in  us.  (19)  For  the  whole  creation  is  hoping  and  19 
waiting  for  the  development'^  of  the  sons  of  God. 
(20)  For  the  creation' was  subjected  to  vanity,  not  by  20 


ROMANS,    VIII. 


289 


27 


its  own  choice,  but  because  of  him  who  subjected  it, 

21  (21)  in  the  hoj^e,  that  also  the  creation  itself  would 
be  emancipated  fz'om  the  bondage  of  corruption, 
into  the  liberty  of  the  glory  of  the  sons  of  God. 

22  (22)  For  we  know,  that  all  the  creatures'"  are  groan- 

23  iug  and  travailing  in  pain  unto  this  day.  (23)  And 
not  only  they,  but  we  also  in  whom  are  the  first 
fruits  of  the  Spirit,  we  groan  within  ourselves,  and 
look  anxiously  for  the  adoption  of  sons,  the  redemp- 

21:  tion  of  our  bodies.  (24)  Because  we  live  in"  hope. 
But  hope  that  is  seen,  is  not  hope :  for  if  we  saw  it, 

25  how  should  we  hope  for  it?  (25)  But  if  we  hope 
for  that  which  is  not  seen,  we  are  in  patient  waiting. 

26  (26)  So  also  the  Spirit  aideth  our  weakness.  For 
we  know  not  what  to  pray  for,  in  a  proper  manner ; 
but  the  Spirit  prayeth  for  tis,  with  groans  not 
expressible:  (27)  and  the  explorer  of  hearts,  he 
knoweth  what  is  the  mind  of  the  Spirit ;  because  he 
praj'cth  for  the  saints,  agreeably  to  the  good  pleas- 

28  ure  of  God. — (28)  And  we  know  that  he  aideth 
them  in  all  things,  for  good,  who  love  God ;  them 

29  whom  he  predcstinedo  to  be  called.  (29)  And  he 
knew  them,  j)reviously;  and  he  sealeclp  them  with 
the  likeness  of  the  image  of  his  Son ;  that  He  might 

30  be  the  first-born  of  many  brothers.  (30)  And 
those  whom  he  previously  sealed,  them  he  called  : 
and  those  whom  he  called,  them  he  justified :  and 

31  those  Avhom  he  justified,  them  he  glorified.  (31) 
What  then  shall  we  say  of  these  things?     If  God 

32  [is]  for  us ;  who  [is]  against  us  ?  (32)  And,  if  he 
spared  not  his  Son,  but  gave  him  up  for  us  all, 
how  shall  he  not  give  us  all  things,   with  him? 

33  (33)  Who  will  set  himself  against  the  chosen  of 

34  God?  It  is  God  who  justifieth.  (34)  Who  is  it 
that  condemneth  ?  Messiah  died,  and  arose,  and  is 
on  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  maketh  intercession 

35  for  us.  (35)  Whaf  will  sever  me  from  the  love 
of  Messiah  ?  Will  affliction  ?  or  distress  ?  or  perse- 
cution ?  or  famine  ?  or  nakedness  ?  or  peril  ?  or  the 

36  sword  ?  (36)  As  it  is  written :  For  thy  sake,  we 
die  daily :  and,  we  are  accounted  as  sheep  for  the 

37  slaughter.     (37)  But  in  all  these  things  we  are  vic- 

38  torious,  by  means  of  him  who  loved  us.  (38)  For 
I  am  persuaded,  that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor 
angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things 

39  present,  nor  things  to  come,  (39)  nor  height,  nor 


Sy.lA^'jLo 


»  or,  hj. 


oSy. 

P  or,  niarked. 


Sy.  WJiol 


290 


ROMANS,    IX. 


a  Sy.  "ilD^j^ 
>>  Sy.  ^^iXjo 
=  in  behalf  of. 

<=  Sy.  ]Q)»n 


^  Sy.  fallen  to 
fall. 


depth,  nor  any  other  creature,  will  be  able  to  sever 
me  from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  ia  our  Lord  Je- 
sus Messiah. 

I  say  the  truth  in  Messiah,  and  do  not  misrepre-  IX. 
sent ;  and  my  conscience  bearcth  me  witness  in  the 
Holy  Spirit ;  (2)  that  I  have  great  sorrow,  and  the     2 
sadness  of  my  heart  is  'unceasing.     (3)  For  I  have     3 
prayed,   that  I  myself  might  be  accursed^  from 
Messiah,  for''  my  brethren  and  my  kinsmen  in  the 
flesh :  (4)  who  are  sons  of  Israel,  to  whom  belonged    4 
the  adoption  of  sons,  and  the  glory,  and  the  cove- 
nants," and  the  law,  and  the  ministration,  and  the 
promises,   and  the  fathers ;    (5)  and  from  among     5 
whom,  Messiah  appeared  in  the  ilesh,  who  is  God 
over  all ;  to  whom  be  praises  and  benediction,  for 
ever  and  ever ;  Amen. 

Not,    however,    that   the    word    of   God    hath     6 
actually  failed. <i     For  all  are  not  Israel,  who  are 
of  Israel.     (7)  Neither  are  they  all  sons,  because     7 
they  are  of  the  seed  of  Abraham :  for  it  was  said. 
In  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  called.     (8)  That  is,  it     8 
is  not  the  children  of  the  flesh,  who  are  the  chil- 
dren of  God ;  but  the  children  of  the  promise,  are 
accounted  for  the  seed.     (9)  For  the  word  of  pro- 
mise was  this :  At  that  time  will  I  come,  and  Sarah 
shall  have  a  son.     (10)  Nor  this  only ;  but  Eebecca 
also,  when  she  had  cohabited  Avith  one  [man],  our 
father  Isaac,  (11)  before  her  children  were  born,  or  11 
had  done  good  or  evil,  the  choice  of  God  was  pre- 
declared  ;  that  it  might  stand,  not  of  works,  but  of 
him  who  called.     (12)  For  it  was  said:  The  elder 
shall  be  servant  to  the  younger.      (13)  As  it  is 
written :  Jacob  have  I   loved,  and  Esau   have  I 
hated.     (14)  What  shall  we  say  then?     Is  there 
iniquity  with  God  ?     Far  be  it.    (15)  Behold,  to  15 
Moses  also  he  said :  I  Avill  have  pity,  on  whom  I 
will  have  pity ;  and  I  will  be  merciful,  to  Avhom  I 
will  be  merciful.     (16)  Therefore,  it  is  not  of  him  16 
who  is  willing,  nor  of  him  who  runneth,  but  of  the 
merciful  God.     (17)  For  in  the  scripture,  he  said  17 
to  Pharaoh :  For  this  very  thing,  have  I  raised 
thee  up  ;  that  I  might  shew  my  power  in  thee,  and 
that  my  name  miglit  be  proclaimed  in  all  the  earth. 
(18)   AVherefore,    he   hath    pity   ui)on   whom   he  18 
plcascth  ;   and  whom  he  pleaseth,  he  hardcneth. — 


9 


10 


12 
13 

14 


ROMANS,    X. 


291 


19  (19)  But,  perhaps  thou  wilt  say :  Of  what  [then] 
doth  he  complain  ?     For,  who  hath  resisted   his 

20  pleasure?  (20)  Thou,  thus!  Who  art  thou?  0 
man;  that  thou  repliest  against  God!  Shall  the 
potter's  vessel  say  to  the  foriner  of  it,  Why  hast 

21  thou  formed  me  so?  (21)  Hath  not  the  potter 
dominion  over  his  clay  out  of  the  same  mass  to 
make  vessels,  one  for  honor,  and  another  for  dis- 

22  honor?  (22)  And  if  God,  being  disposed  to  ex- 
hibit his  wrath  and  to  make  known  his  power,  in 
abundance  of  long-suffering,  brought  wrath  upon 
the  vessels  of  wrath  which  were  complete  for  de- 

23  struction;  (23)  and  made  his  mercy  flow  forth 
upon  the  vessels  of  mercy,  which  were  prepared 

2-4  by  God  for  glory ;  (21)  namely,  upon  us  who  are 
called,  not  of  the  Jews  only,  but  also  of  the  Gen- 

25  tiles  : — (25)  As  also  he  said  in  Ilosea :  I  will  call 
them  my  people,  Avho  were  not  my  people;  and 

26  will  pity,  whom  I  have  not  pitied:  (26)  For  it 
shall  be,  that  in  the  place  where  they  were  called 
Not  my  people,   there  shall  they  be  called   The 

27  children  of  the  living  God.  (27)  And  Isaiah  pro- 
claimed concerning  the  children  of  Israel :  Though 
the  number  of  the  children  of  Israel  should  be  as 
the  sand  on  the  sea,  a  remnant  of  them  will  live.<^ 

28  (28)  He  hath  finished  and  cut  short  the  matter  :f 

29  and  the  Lord  will  do  it  on  the  earth.  (29)  And 
according  to  what  Isaiah  had  before  said :  If  the 
Lord  of  hosts  had  not  flavored  us  with  a  residue, 
we  had  been  as  Sodora,  and  liad  been  like  Gomor- 
rha. 

30  What  shall  we  say  then  ?  That  the  Gentiles, 
who  ran  not  after  righteousness,  &  have  found 
righteousness,  even  the  righteousness  which  is  by 

31  faith :  (31)  But  Israel,  who  ran  after  the  law  of 
righteousness,  hath  not  found  the  law  of  righteous- 

32  ness.  (32)  And  why?  Because  [they  sought  it], 
not  by  faith,  but  by  the  works  of  the  law.     For 

33  they  stumbled  at  that  stumbling-stone :  (33)  As  it 
is  written,  Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  a  stumbling-stone, 
and  a  stone  of  offence :  and  he  who  believeth  in 
him,'^  shall  not  be  ashamed. 

X.      My  Brethren,  The  desire  of  my  heart,  and  my 

intercession  with  God  for  them,  is,  that  they  might 

2  have  life.'^     (2)  For  I  bear  them  witness,  that  there 


®  or,  be  saved. 
f  Sv.  the  word. 


e  Sy.  ]2.QJLxI3 


Sy.  it. 


or,  he  saved. 


^  Sy.  yfT,  = 
end,  scope, 
summarij. 

'  Sv. 


^  Sy.  ^Q_i-» 
"  Sy.  ]Wv£3 

'  or,  Z)e  saved. 
E  or,  is  sarei. 


''  or,  he  saved. 


•  Sy.  daughter 
of  our  voice, 

'  Sy.  daughter 
of  their  voice. 


is  in  them  a  zeal  for  God ;  but  it  is  not  accordins; 
to  knowledge.     (3)  For  they  know  not  the  righ-     3 
teousncss  of  God,  but  seek  to  establish  their  own 
righteousness :   and  therefore  they  have  not  sub- 
mitted themselves  to  the  righteousness  of  God. 

(4)  For  Messiah  is  the  ?am^  of  the  law,  for  righte-     4 
ousness,''  unto  every  one  that  believeth  in  him. — 

(5)  For  Moses  describeth  the  righteousness,  which  is     5 
by  the  law,  thus:  Whoever  shall  do  these  things, 
shallliveby  them.    (6)  But  the  righteousness  which     6 
is  by  faith,  saith  thus:  Thou  shalt  not  say  in  thy 
heart.  Who   ascendeth   to   heaven,  and  bringctli 
Messiah  down  ?     (7)  Or,  Who  descendetli  to  the     7 
abyss  of  the  grave, «^  and  bringeth  up  Messiah  from 
the  place  of  the  dead  ?     (8)  But  what  saith  it  ?     8 
The  thinge  is  near  to  thy  mouth,  and  to  thy  heart : 
that  is,  the  word   of  faith,   which  we   proclaim. 

(9)  And  if  thou  shalt  confess  with  thy  mouth  our     9 
Lord  Jesus,  and  shalt  believe  with  thy  heart,  that 
God  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead  ;  thou  shalt  live.^ 

(10)  For  the  heart  that  believeth  in  him,  is  justified;  10 
and  the  mouth  -that  confesseth  him,  is  restored^  to 
life.     (11)  For  the  scripture  saith  :  Every  one  that  11 
believeth  in  him,  shall  not  be  ashamed.    (12)  And  12 
in  this,  it  discriminateth  neither  Jews  nor  Gentiles. 
For  there  is  one  Lord  over  them  all,  who  is  rich, 
towards  every  one  that  calleth  on  him.     (13)  For  13 
every  one  that  shall  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord, 
will  have''  life.     (14)  How  then  shall  they  call  on  14 
him,  in  whom  they  have  not  believed  ?     Or,  how 
shall  they  believe  in  him,  of  whom  they  have  not 
heard  ?     Or,  how  shall  they  hear,  without  a  preach- 
er ?     (15)  Or,  how  shall  they  preach,  if  they  arc  15 
not  sent  forth  Z     As  it  is  written :  How  beautiful 
are  the  feet  of  the  heralds  of  peace,  and  of  the  her- 
alds of  good  things? — (16)  But  all  of  them  have  16 
not  obeyed  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel.     (For, 
Isaiah   said:    My  Lord,  who   hath   believed   our 
proclamation  ?J)     (17)  Therefore,  faith  is  from  the  17 
hearing  of  the  ear ;  and  the  hearing  of  the  ear,  is 
from  the  word  of  God.     (18)    But  I  say :  Have  18 
they  not   heard?     And,    lo,    their   proclamation'' 
hath  gone  out  into  all  the  earth ;  and  their  words 

to  the  ends  of  the  world.     (19)  But  I  say :  Did  19 
not  Israel  know?     First,  Moses  said,  thus:  I  will 
awaken  your  emulation,  by  a  people  whicih  is  not  a 


ROMANS,    XL 


293 


people ;  and  by  a  disobedient  people,  I  will  pro- 

20  voke  jou.  (20)  And  Isaiah  was  bold,  and  said: 
I  was  seen  by  those  who  sought  me  not;  and  I  was 

21  found  by  those  who  inquired  not  for  me.  (21)  But 
to  Israel,  he  said :  All  the  day,  have  I  stretched  out 
my  hands  to  a  contentious  and  disobedient  people. 

XL  But  I  say :  Hath  God  cast  off  his  people  ?  Far 
be  it.   For  I  also  am  of  Israel,  of  the  seed  of  Abra- 

2  ham,  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin.  (2)  God  hath  not 
cast  off  those  his  people  whom  he  before  knew. 
Do  ye  not  know,  what,  in  the  scripture  of  God,  he 
said  to  Elijah?     AYhen  he  had  complained  to  God 

3  against  Israel,  and  said :  (3)  My  Lord,  they  have 
slain  thy  prophets,  and  have  thrown  down  thy 
altars ;  and  I  am  left  alone ;   and  they  seek  my 

4  life.  (4)  And  it  was  said  to  him,  by  revelation : 
Behold,  I  have  reserved  for  myself  seven  thousand 
men,  who  have  not  bowed  their  knees,  and  have 

5  not  worshipped  Baal.  (5)  So  also  at  the  present 
time,  a  remnant  is  preserved,  by  the  election^  of 

6  grace.  (6)  But  if  by  grace,  it  is  not  by  'works : 
otherwise,  grace ^  is  not  grace.''  And  if  by  works, 
it  is  not  by  grace  :  Otherwise,  work^  is  not  work.^ 

7  — (7)  What  then  ?  Israel  did  not  obtain  that  which 
it  sought:  but  the  election'i   obtained  it;  and  the 

8  rest  of  them  were  blinded  in  their  heart,  (8) — (as 
it  is  written:  God  gave  them  a  stupid  spirit,  and 
eyes  to  see  not,  and  ears  to  hear  not,) — unto  this 

9  very  day.  (9)  And  again,  David  said :  Let  their 
table  become  a  snare  before  them ;  and  let  their 

10  recompense  be  a  stumbling  block.  (10)  Let  their 
eyes  be  darkened,  that  they  see  not ;  and  let  their 

11  back,  at  all  times,  be  bowed  down. — (11)  But  I 
say:  Have  they  so  stumbled  as  to  fall  entirely? 
Far  be  it.  Bather,  by  their  stumbling,  life«  hath 
come  to  the  Gentiles,  for  [awakening]   their  jeal- 

12  ousy.  (12)  And  if  their  stumbling  was  riches  to 
the  world,  and  their  condemnation  riches  to  the 
Gentiles ;    how  much  more  their  completeness  ?f 

13  (13)  But  [it  is]  to  you  Gentiles,  I  am  speaking : 
as  I  am  a  legate   to  the    Gentiles,   I    honor  my 

1-4  ministry ;  (14)  if,  perhaps,  I  may  provoke  emula- 
tion in  the  children  of  my  flesh,  and  may  vivify? 

15  some  of  them.  (15)  For  if  the  rejection  of  them, 
was  a  reconciliation  of  the  world  ;  what  will  their 


Sy. 

Sy.  "ly-LL 

Sy.  lAjt^^ 


^  or,  salvation. 


^Sy. 


ff  or,  save. 


294 


ROMANS,    XI. 


^  or,  be  saved. 
'  Sy.  loA..^ 


"  Sy. 


20 


21 


24 


conversion  be,  but  life  from  the  dead?     (16)  For,  16 
if  the  first-fruits  [are]  holj,  then  the  mass  [is]  also : 
and  if  the  root  is  holy,  then  also  the  branches. — 

(17)  And  if  some  of  the  branches  were  plucked  17 
off;  and  thou,  an  olive  from  the  desert,  wast  in- 
grafted in  their  place,  and  hast  become  a  partici- 
pator of  the  root  and   fatness  of  the  olive-tree ; 

(18)  do  not  glory  over  the  branches.     For  if  thou  18 
gloriest,  thou  sustainest  not  the  root,  but  the  root 
sustaineth  thee.     (19)  And  shouldst  thou  say,  The  19 
branches  were  plucked  off,  that  I  might  be  grafted 
into   their  place.      (20)  Very   true.      They   were 
plucked  off,  because  they  believed  not ;  and  thou 
standest  by  faith.     Be  not  exalted  in  thy  mind,  but 
fear.     (21)  For   if    God   spared   not   the   natural 
branches,  perhaps  he  Avill  not  spare  you. — (22)  Be-  22 
hold  now  the  benignity  and  the  severity  of  God : 

on  them  who  fell,  severity ;  but  on  thee,  benignity, 
if  thou  continuest  in  that  benignity;  and  if  not, 
thou  also  wilt  be  plucked  off.  (23)  And  they,  if  23 
they  do  not  continue  in  their  destitution  of  f:\ith, 
even  they  will  be  grafted  in ;  for  God  is  able  to 
graft  them  in  again.  (2-1)  For  if  thou  wast  pluck- 
ed from  the  wild  olive-tree,  which  was  natural  to 
thee,  and  wast  grafted,  contrary  to  thy  nature, 
into  a  good  olive-tree  ;  how  much  more  may  they 
be  grafted  into  their  natural  olive-tree  ? — (25)  And  25 
that  ye,  my  brethren,  may  not  be  wise  in  your 
own  apprehension,  I  wish  you  to  know  this  mys- 
tery, that  blindness  of  heart  hath  in  some  measure 
befallen  Israel,  until  the  fullness  of  the  Gentiles 
shall  come  in:  (26)  and  then,  will  all  Israel  livc.'i  26 
As  it  is  written :  A  deliverer  will  come  from  Zion, 
and  will  turn  away  iniquity  from  Jacob.  (27)  And  27 
then  will  they  have  the  covenant'  that  proceedeth 
from  me,  when  I  shall  have  forgiven  their  sins. 
(28)  Now,  in  the  gospel,  they  are  enemies  for  your  28 
sake;  but  in  the  election,  they  are  beloved  for  the 
fathers'  sake,  (29)  For  God  is  not  changeable  in 
his  free  gift  and  in  his  calling.^  (30)  For  as  ye 
too  were  formerly  disobedient  to  God,  and  have 
now  obtained  mercy,  because  of  their  disobedience ; 
(31)  so  also  are  they  now  disobedient  to  tlie  mercy 
which  is  upon  you,  that  there  may  be  mercy  on 
them  likewise.  (32)  For  God  hath  shut  up  all 
men  in  disobedience,  that  upon  all  men  he  might 


29 
30 


32 


ROMANS,    XII. 


295 


83  liave  mercy. — (33)  0  the  depth  of  the  riches,  and 
the  wisdom,  and  the  knowledge  of  God !  For 
man  hath  not  searched  out  his  judgments ;  and  his 

84  ways  are  inscrutable.  (34)  For  who  hath  known 
the  mind  of  the  Lord  ?    Or  who  hath  been  a  coun- 

35  seller  to  him?     (35)  Or  who  hath  first  given  to 

3Q  him,  and  then  received  from  him  ?     (36)  Because, 

all  is  from  him,  and  all  by  him,  and  all  through 

him:    to  whom  be  praises  and  benedictions,  for 

ever  and  ever :     Amen. 

XII.  I  beseech  you,  therefore,  my  brethren,  by  the 
mercies  of  God,  tliat  ye  present  your  bodies  a  liv- 
ing sacrifice,  holy  and  acceptable  to  God,  by  a  ra- 

2  tional  service  [of  him].  (2)  And  be  not  conformed 
to  this  world ;  but  be  ye  transformed,  by  the  reno- 
vation of  your  minds :  and  discern  ye  what  is  the 
good  and  acceptable  and  perfect  pleasure  of  God. 

3  (3)  And,  by  the  grace  given  to  me,  I  say  to  you 
all :  Do  not  carry  thoughts,  beyond  what  ye  ought 
to  think ;  but  think  with  modesty,  as  God  hath 
distributed    to   each   one   his   measure    of   faith. 

4  (4)  For  as  we  [severally]  have  many  members  in 
one  body,  and  all  those  members  have  not   the 

5  same  functions ;  (5)  so  also  we,  who  are  [collec- 
tively] many  persons,  are  one  body  in  Messiah, 

6  and  are  naturally  members  of  each  other.  (6)  But 
we  have  difierent  gifts,  ^^  according  to  the  grace 
given  to  us.     There  is  that  of  prophecy,  according 

7  to  the  measure  of  his  faith.  (7)  And  there  is  that 
of  ministration,  possessed  by  one  in  his  ministry. 
And  there  is  that  of  a  teacher,  in  his  teaching. 

8  (8)  And  there  is  that  of  a  consoler,  in  his  conso- 
ling: And  that  of  a  giver,''  with  simplicity:  And 
that  of  a  presider,*^  with  dexterity :  And  of  a  sym- 

9  pathizer,  with  cheerfulness.* — (9)  Let  not  your 
love  be  guileful :  but  be  haters  of  evil  things,  and 

lOadherers  to  good  things.  (10)  Be  affectionate  to 
your  brethren :  and  love  one  another.    Be  foremost 

llin  honoring  one  another,  (11)  Be  active  ;  and  not 
slothful.     Be  fervent  in  spirit.      Be  laborers  for 


Sy. 


*•  or,  distributor. 

"  Sy.  standing 

at  the  head. 


*  In  this  catalogue  of  gifts,  verses  6,  7,  8,  the  Syriac  merely  descrihes  them, 
giving  no  directions  for  the  right  use  of  them.  Whether  the  Greek  original  will 
admit  tlie  same  exposition,  the  learned  will  decide.  I  see  no  evidence,  that  the 
Syriac  translator  had  an  essentially  ditferent  Greek  text  before  him. 


296 


ROMANS,    XIII. 


"^  Sy. 
]»i'rnn'|  — 
Gr.  ^svoi. 


Sy. 
commanded. 


our  Lord.     (12)  Be  joyful  in  your  hope.     Be  pa-  12 
tient  under   your  afflictions.     Be  persevering   in 
prayer.     (13)  Be  communicators  to  the  wants  of  13 
the   saints.     Be  kind  to   strangers. '^     (1-1)    Bless  14 
your  persecutors:  bless,  and  curse  not.     (15)  lie-  15 
joice  with  them  who  rejoice  :  and  weep  with  them 
who  weep.      (16)    What  estimation  ye  make  of  16 
yourselves,   [make]  also  of  your  brethren.     And 
indulge  not  high  thoughts;   but  unite  yourselves 
with  the  lowly  minded.     And  be  not  wise  in  your 
own  estimation.     (17)  And  repay  to  no  man  evil  17 
for  evil :    but  let  it  be  your  study  to  do   good, 
before  all  men.     (18)  And  if  possible,  so  far  as  it  18 
dependeth  on  you,  live  in  peace  with  every  man. 
(19)  And  be  ye  not  avengers  of  yourselves,  ray  19 
beloved  :  but  give  place  to  wrath.     For  it  is  writ- 
ten :  If  thou  dost  not  execute  judgment  for  thyself, 
I  will  execute  judgment  for  thee,  saith  God.     (20)  20 
And  if  thy  adversary  be  hungry,  feed  him:  and  if 
he  be  thirsty,  give  him  drink.     For  if  thou  doest 
these  things  to  him,  thou  wilt  heap  coals  of  fire  on 
his  head.     (21)  Be  ye  not  overcome  by  evil;  but  21 
overcome  evil  with  good. 

Let  every  soul  be  subject  to  the  authorities  of  XIII. 
magistracy.      For  there  is  no  authority  which  is 
not  from  God :  and  the  authorities  which  exist,  are 
established^'  by  God.     (2)  He  therefore  who  oppo-     2 
scth  the  authority,  opposeth  the  establishment  of 
God;  and  they   who  oppose  them,   shall    receive 
judgment.     (3)  For  judges  arc  not  a  terror  to  good     3 
deeds,  but  to  evil  deeds.     Wouldst  thou  then  not 
be  afraid  of  the  authority  ?     Do  good,  and  thou 
shalt  have  praise  from  it.     (4)  For  he  is  the  rain-     4 
isterb  of  God ;  but  it  is  to  thee  for  good.     But  if 
thou  doest  evil,  be  afraid ;    for  he  is  not  girded 
with  the  sword  in  vain  ;  for  he  is  a  minister  of 
God,  and  an  avenger  of  wrath  to  them  that  do  evil 
things.     (5)  And  therefore,  it  is  necessary  for  us     5 
to  be  obedient,  not  only  on  account  of  wrath,  but 
likewise  on  account  of  our  consciences.     (6)  For     6 
this  cause  also  ye  pay  tribute  money ;  for  they  are 
the  ministers  of  God,  established  for  these  same 
objects.     (7)  Render  therefore  to  every  one,  as  is     7 
due  to  him ;  tribute-money,  to  whom  tribute-money; 
and  excise,  to  whom  excise;  and  fear,  to  whom 


ROMANS,    XIV. 


297 


8  fear ;  and  honor,  to  whom  honor. — (8)  And  owe 
nothing  to  anj  one;  but  to  love  one  another. 
For  he  that  loveth  his  neighbor,  hath  fulfilled  the 

9  law.  (9)  For  this  likewise,  which  it  saith  :  Thou 
shalt  not  kill ;  nor  commit  adultery ;  nor  steal ; 
nor  covet ;  and  if  there  is  any  other  commandment, 
it  is  completed  in  this  sentence :  Thou  shalt  love 

10  thy  neighbor  as  thyself.  (10)  Love  doeth  no  evil 
to  one's  neighbor;  because  love  is  the  fulfillment 

11  of  the  law. — (11)  And  this  also  know  ye,  that  it  is 
the  time  and  the  hour,  that  we  should  henceforth 
be  awake  from  our  sleep.     For  now  our  life<=  hath 

12  come  nearer  to  us,  than  when  we  believed.  (12) 
The  night  now  passeth  away,  and  the  da}^  draweth 
near.  Let  us  therefore  cast  from  us  the  works  of 
darkness  ;  and  let  us  put  on  the  armor  of  light. 

13  (13)  And  let  us  walk  decorously,  as  in  daylight ; 
not  in  merriment,  nor  in  drunkenness,  nor  in  im- 

14  purity  of  the  bed,  nor  in  envy  and  strife.  (14)  But 
clothe  yourselves  with  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah : 
and  be  not  thoughtful  about  your  flesh,  for  the  in- 
dulgence of  appetites. 

XIV.  To  him  who  is  feeble  in  the  faith,  reach  forth 
the  hand.     And  be  not  divided  in  your  thoughts. 

2  (2)  For  one  man  believeth,  that  he  may  eat  every 

3  thing :  and  he  that  is  feeble,  eateth  herbs.  (3)  And 
he  that  eateth,  should  not  despise  him  that  eateth 
not;  and  he  that  eateth  not,  should  not  judge  him 

4  that  eateth,  for  God  hath  received  him.  (4)  Who 
art  thou,  that  thou  judgest  a  servant  not  thine; 
and  who,  if  he  stancleth,  he  standeth  to  his  Lord ; 
and  if  he  fdleth,  he  ftiUeth  to  his  Lord?  But  he 
will  assuredly  stand ;  for  his  Lord  hath  power  to 

5  establish  him.  (5)  One  man  discriminatcth  be- 
tween days;a-  and  another  judgeth  all  days  alike. 
But  let  every  one  be  sure,  in  regard  to  his  knowl- 

6  edge.  (6)  He  that  esteemeth  a  day,  esteemeth  [it] 
for  his  Lord  :  and  he  that  esteemeth  not  a  day,  for 
his  Lord,  he  doth  not  esteem  [it.]  And  he  that 
eateth,  eateth  to  his  Lord,  and  giveth  thanks  to 
God  :  and  he  that  eateth  not,  to  his  Lord  he  eateth 

7  not,  and  giveth  thanks  to  God.  (7).  For  there  is 
not  one  of  us,  who  liveth  for  himself:  and  there 

8  is  not  one,  who  dieth  for  himself.  (8)  Because,  if 
we  live,  to  our  Lord  it  is  we  live ;  or  if  we  die,  to 


or,  salvation. 


'  Sy.  a  day 
from  a  day. 


298 


ROMANS,   XV. 


•>  Sy.  ZojALd 


Sy.  j_«.£iji 


Sy. 


11 

12 


our  Lord  it  is  we  die.  Whetlier  we  live,  tlierefore, 
or  whether  we  die,  we  are  our  Lord's,  (9)  More-  9 
over,  for  this  cause  Messiah  died,  and  revived,  and 
arose ;  that  he  might  be  Lord  of  the  dead  and  of 
the  hving.  (10)  But  thou,  why  dost  thou  judge  10 
thy  brother?  or,  why  dost  thou  despise  thy  bro- 
ther ?  For  we  must  all  stand  before  the  judgment 
seat  of  Messiah,  (11)  as  it  is  written:  As  I  live, 
saith  the  Lord,  to  me  every  knee  shall  bow;  and 
to  me  every  tongue  shall  give  praise.  (12)  So 
then,  every  one  of  us  must  give  account  of  himself 
to  God. — (13)  Henceforth,  judge  ye  not  one  anoth-  13 
cr;  but  rather,  judge  ye  this,  that  thou  erect  not 
a  stumbling-block  for  thy  brother.  (14)  I  know,  14 
indeed,  and  am  persuaded  by  the  Lord  Jesus,  that 
there  is  nothins-  which  is  unclean  in  itself;  but  to 
him  who  thinketh  any  thing  to  be  unclean,  to  him 
only  it  is  defiled.  (15)  But  if  thou  grievest  thy 
brother,  because  of  food,  thou  walkest  not  in  love. 
On  account  of  food,  destroy  not  him  for  whom 
Messiah  died. — (16)  And  let  not  our  good  thing  be 
matter  of  reproach.  (17)  For  the  kingdom^  of 
God,  is  not  food  and  drink ;  but  is  righteousness, 
and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Spirit.  (18)  For 
he  who  is  in  these  things  a  servant  of  Messiah, 
is  pleasing  to  God,  and  approved  before  men. 
(19)  Now  let  us  strive  after  peace,  and  after  the  edi- 
fication of  one  another.  (20)  And  let  us  not,  on 
account  of  food,  destroy  the  work  of  God.  For 
every  thing  is,  [indeed,]  pure ;  yet  it  is  evil,  to  the 
man  who  eateth  with  stumbling.  (21)  It  is  proper,  ^ 
that  we  neither  eat  flesh,  nor  drink  wine,  nor  [do] 
any  thing,  whereby  our  brother  is  stumbk^d. 
(22)  Thou  art  one  in  whom  there  is  faith ;  keep  it  22 
to  thyself,  before  God.  Blessed  is  he,  who  doth 
not  condemn  himself,  in  that  thing  wliich  he  al- 
loweth.  (23)  For  he  who  eateth  and  doubteth,  is  23 
condemned ;  because  [he  eateth]  not  in  faith.  For 
every  thing  which  is  not  of  faith,  is  sin. 

We  then  who  are  strong,  ought  to  bear  the  XV. 
infirmity  of  the  weak,  and  not  to  please  ourselves. 
(2)  But  each  of  us  should  please  his  neighbor,  in     2 
good  things,  as  conducive  to  edification. =^     (3)  Be-     3 
cause  Messiah  also  did  not  please  himself;  but,  as 
it  is  written :  The  reviling  of  thy  revilers  fell  upon 


15 


16 
17 

18 


19 
20 


21 


ROMANS,    XV. 


299 


4  me.  (4)  For  every  thing  written  of  old,  was  written 
for  our  instruction  ;  that  we,  by  patience  and  by  the 
consolation  of  the  scriptures,  might  possess  hope. 

5  (5)  And  may  the  God  of  patience  and  of  consola- 
tion, grant  to  you,  to  think  in  harmony  one  with 

6  another,  in  Jesus  Messiah ;  (6)  so  that  with  one 
mind   and   one  mouth,   ye   may  glorify  God,  the 

7  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah. — (7)  Wherefore, 
receive  ye  and  bear  up  one  another,  as  also  Messiah 

8  received  you,  to  the  glory  of  God.  (8)  Now  I  say, 
that  Jesus  Messiah  ministered  to  the  circumcision, 
in  behalf  of  the  truth  of  God,  in  order  to  confirm 

9  the  promise  [made]  to  the  fathers  ;  (9)  and  that  the 
Gentiles  might  glorify  God  for  his  mercies  upon 
them,  as  it  is  written :  I  will  confess  to  thee  among 
the  Gentiles,  and  to  thy  name  will  I  sing  psalms, 

10  (10)  And  again  he  said  :  Rejoice,  ye  Gentiles,  with 

11  his  people.  (11)  And  again  he  said:  Praise  the 
Lord,  all  ye  Gentiles ;   [and]  laud  him,  all  ye  na- 

12  tions.  (12)  And  again  Isaiah  said :  There  will  be 
a  root  of  Jesse ;  and  he  that  shall  arise,  will  be  a 
prince  for  the  Gentiles ;  and  in  him  will  the  Gen- 

13  tiles  hope. — (lo)  Now  may  the  God  of  hope  fill 
you  with  all  joy  and  peace,  by  faith ;  that  ye  may 
abound  in  his  hope,  by  the  power''  of  the  Iloly 
Spirit. 

Now  I  am  persuaded,  my  Brethren,  even  I,  con- 
cerning you ;  that  ye  too  are  full  of  goodness,  and 
are  replenished  with  all  knowledge,  and  are  able 
also  to  instruct  others.  (15)  Yet  I  have  written 
rather  boldly  to  you,  my  Brethren,  that  I  might 
jDut  you  in  remembrance ;    because  of  the  grace 

16  which  is  given  to  me  by  God,  (16)  that  I  should  be 
a  minister  of  Jesus  Messiah  among  the  Gentiles, 
and  should  subserve  the  gospel  of  God,  that  the 
oblation*^  of  the  Gentiles  might  be  acceptable,  and 

17  be  sanctified  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  (17)  I  have 
therefore  a  glorying  in  Jesus  Messiah,  before  God. 

18  (18)  Yet  I  presume  not  to  speak  of  any  thing  [done] 
for  the  obedience  of  the  Gentiles,  which  Messiah 
hath  not  wrought  b}'  me,  in  word  and  in  deeds, 

19  (19)  by  the  power  of  signs  and  wonders,  and  by 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  so  that  from  Jerusa- 
lem I  have  made  a  circuit  quite  to  Illyricum,  and 
have  fulfilled  the  announcement  of  the  Messiah  ; 

20  (20)  while  I  was  careful  not  to  preach  where  the 


1-4 


15 


or,  energy. 


Sv. 


P_Ci3Q_0 


300 


ROMANS,   XVI. 


"J  Sy.  that  a 
communica- 
tion should  he, 

<SfC. 


''  Sy.  ask  ye  of 
the  feace  of. 


name  of  Messiah  bad  been  invoked,  lest  I  sboald 
build  upon  another  man's  foundation  ;  (21)  but,  as  21 
it  is  written  :  They,  to  whom  mention  of  him  had 
not  been  made,  will  see  him ;  and  they,  who  had 
not  heard,  will  be   obedient. — (22)    And   on  this  22 
account,  I  have  been  many  times  prevented  from 
coming  to  you.     (23)  But  now,  since  I  have  no  23 
place  in  these  regions,  and  as  I  have  been  desirous 
for  many  years  past  to  come  to  you,  (2-i)  when  I  24: 
go  to  Spain,  I  hope  to  come  and  see  you ;  and  that 
ye  will  accompany  me  thither,  when  I  shall  have 
been  satisfied,  in  some  measure,  with  visiting  you, 
— (25)  But  I  am  now  going  to  Jerusalem,  to  minis-  25 
ter  to  the  saints.     (26)  For  they  of  Macedonia  and  26 
Achaia,  have  been  willing  to  make  up  a  contribu- 
tionfi  for  the  needy  saints  who  are  at  Jerusalem. 
(27)   They  were  willing,  because  thej  were  also  27 
debtors  to  them  :  for  if  the  Gentiles  have  been  par- 
ticipators with  them  in  the  Spirit,  they  are  debtors 
to   serve  them  also  in  things  of  the  flesh.     (28)  28 
When    therefore,  I  shall  have  accomplished  this, 
and  shall  have  sealed  to  them  this  fruit,  I  will  pass 
by  you  into  Spain.     (29)  And  I  know  that  when  129 
come  to  you,  I  shall  come  in  the  fullness  of  the 
blessing  of  the   gospel  of  Messiah. — (30)  And  I  30 
beseech  you,  my  Brethren,  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Mes- 
siah, and  by  the  love  of  the  Spirit,  that  ye  labor 
with  me  in  prayer  to  God  for  me;  (31)  that  I  may  31 
be  delivered  from  them  in  Judasa,  who  believe  not; 
and  that  the  ministration, ^  which  I  carry  to  the 
saints  in  Jerusalem,  may  be  well  received ;  (32)  and  32 
that,  by  the  good  pleasure  of  God,  I  may  come  to 
you  with  joy,  and  may  take  comfort  with  you. — 
(33)  And  ma}'  the  God  of  peace  be  with  you  all :  33 
Amen. 

And  I  commend  to  you  Phebe,  our  sister,  who  XVI. 
is  a  servant=^  of  the  church  in  Cenchrea :  (2)  that     2 
ye  may  receive  her  in  ou^  Lord,  as  is  just  for  saints ; 
and  that  ye  may  assist  her,  in  whatever  thing  she 
may  ask  of  you  :  for  she  also  hath  been  assistant  to 
man}'-,  and  to  me  also, — (3)  Salute''  ye  Priscilla     3 
and  Aquila,  my  fellow-laborers  in  Jesus  Messiah ;. 
(i)  who,  for  my  life,  surrendered  their  own  necks  ;     4 
and  to  whom,  not  only  I  am  grateful,  but  also  all 
the  churches  of  the  Gentiles.     (5)  And  give  a  salu-     5 


tation  to  the   church''   which   is   in   their  house. 
Salute  my  beloved  Epenetus,  who  was  the  first- 

6  fruits  of  Achaia  in  Messiah.     (6)  Salute  Marj,  who 

7  hath  toiled  much  with  you.  (7)  Salute  Andro- 
nicus  and  Junia,  my  relatives, ^^  who  were  in  cap- 
tivity with  me,  and  are  of  note  among  the  legates, 

8  and  were  in  Messiah  before  me.     (8)    Salute  Ara- 

9  jilias,  my  beloved  in  our  Lord.  (9)  Salute  Urbanus, 
a  laborer  with   us  in  Messiah ;    and  my  beloved 

10  Stachj-s.  (10)  Salute  Apelles,  chosen  in  our  Lord. 
Salute  the  members'' of  the  house  of  Aristobulus. 

11  (11)  Salute  Herodion,  my  kinsman.  Salute  the 
members''  of  the  house  of  Narcissus,  who  are  in 

12  our  Lord.  (12)  Salute  Tryphcna  and  Tryphosa, 
who  toil  in  our  Lord.     Salute  my  beloved  Persis, 

13  who  toiled  much  in  our  Lord.  (13)  Salute  Rufus, 
chosen  in  our  Lord  ;    and   his   and  my  mother. 

11  (14)  Salute  Asyncritus,  and  Phlegon,  and  Ilermas, 
and  Patrobas,  and  Hermes,  and  the  brethren  who 

15  are  with  them.  (15)  Salute  Philologus  and  Julia, 
Nereus  and  his  sister,  and  Olympas,  and  all  the 

16  saints  who  are  with  them.  (16)  Salute  one  another, 
with  a  holy  kiss.  All  the  churches  of  Messiah 
salute  you. 

17  And  I  beseech  you,  my  Brethren,  that  ye  be- 
ware of  them  who  cause  divisions  and  stumblings 
[among  you],  aside  from  the  doctrine  which  3''e 
have  learned  :    and  that  ye  stand  aloof  from  them. 

18  (18)  For  they  who  are  such,  do  not  serve  our  Lord 
Jesus  Messiah,  but  their  own  belly :  and  by  bland 
speeches  and  good  washes, ^  they  beguile  the  hearts 

19  of  the  simple.  (19)  But  your  obedience  is  known 
to  every  one.  I  therefore  rejoice  in  you :  and  I 
would   have   you  be  wise  in  what   is   good,  and 

20  blameless  in  what  is  evil.  (20)  And  the  God  of 
peace  will  soon  crush  Satan  uncLer  your  feet.  The 
grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah,  be  with  you. 

21  Timothy,  my  fellow-laborer,  and  Lucius,  and 
Jason,    and   Sosipater,  my  kinsmen,   salute  you. 

22  (22)  I  Tertius,  who  have  written  this  epistle,  salute 

23  you  in  the  Lord.  (23)  Gains,  hospitable  to  me  and 
to  all  the  church,  saluteth  you.  Erastus,  the 
steward  of  the  city,  and  Quartus  a  brother,  salute 
you. 

25  Now  unto  God,  who  is  able  to  establish  you, — 
(according    to  my   gospel,    which    is  proclaimed 


Sy.  Ua 


^  Sy. .»  1  I  1^") 


Sy.  sons. 


'  or,  benedic- 
tions. 


302 


1    CORINTHIANS,   I. 


e  Sy.  from  the 
times  of  ages. 


or,  deaconess. 


concerning  Jesus  Messiah ;  and  according  to  the 
revelation  of  the  mystery,  which  was  hidden  from 
the  times  that  are  past,s  (26)  but  is  at  this  time  26 
revealed,  by  means  of  the  scriptures  of  the  prophets; 
and  by  the  command  of  the  eternal  God,  is  made 
known  to  all  the  Gentiles,  for  the  obedience  of 
f\iith ;)  (27)  [to  him]  who  only  is  wise,  be  glory,  27 
throuo;h  Jesus  Messiah,  for  ever  and  ever:  Amen. 

The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah,  be  with  24 
you  all :  Amen.* 

End  of  the  epistle  to  the  Romans ;  which  teas  ivritten  from 
Corinth;  and  was  sent  by  the  hand  of  Phebe,  a  faithful 
servant."- 


The  First  Epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Corinthians. 


sy-u^:^ 


or,  bij. 


«  or,  revelation. 


Paul,  called  and  sent  by  Jesus  Messiah  in  the 
crood  pleasure  of  God;  and  Sosthenes,  a  brother; 
(2)  to  the  churcha  of  God  which  is  at  Corinth,  to 
the  [people]  called  and  sanctified,  who  are  sanctified 
in  Jesus  Messiah  ;  and  to  all  them,  in  every  place, 
who  invoke  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  ^Messiah, 
their  and  our  [Lord] :  (3)  Grace  [be]  with  you,  and 
peace ;  from  God  our  Father,  and  from  our  Lord 
Jesus  Messiah. 

I  thank  my  God  at  all  times  on  your  behalf,  for 
the  grace  of  God  which  is  given  to  you  in^  Jesus 
Messiah ;  (5)  that  in  every  thing  ye  are  enriched 
by  him,  in  all  discourse,  and  in  all  knowledge ; 
(6)  even  as  the  testimony  of  Messiah  was  confirmed 
among  you  :  (7)  so  that  ye  are  not  inferior  in  any 
one  of  his  gifts ;  but  are  waiting  for  the  manifesta- 
tion<=  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah :  (8)  who  will 
confirm  you  unto  the  end,  so  that  ye  may  be  blame- 


*  In  the  Syriac,  the  24lh  verse  is  thus  phiced  at  tlie  end  of  tlie  Epistle. 


10 


12 


13 
14 


9  less  in  the  day  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah.  (9)  God 
is  faithful  ;  by  whom  ye  have  been  called  into'i  the 
fellowship  of  his  Son,  Jesus  Messiah,  our  Lord. 

And  I  beseech  you,  my  Brethren,  by  the  name 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah,  that  to  you  all  there 
may  be  one  language  ;e  and  that  there  may  be  no 
divisions  among  you :  but  that  ye  may  become 
perfectly  of  one  mind,  and  of  one  way  of  thinking, 
11  (11)  For  concerning  you,  my  Brethren,  it  hath  been 
reported  to  me  by  the  house  of  Chloe,  that  there 
are  contentions  among  you.  (12)  And  this  I  state : 
That  one  of  you  saith,  I  am  of  Paul ;  and  another 
saith,  I  am  of  Apollos ;  and  another  saith,  I  am  of 
Cephas;  and  another  saith,  I  am  of  Messiah. 
(13)  Now  was  Messiah  divided?  Or  was  Paul 
crucified  for  you?  Or  were  ye  baptized  in  the 
name  of  Paul  ?  (14)  I  thank  my  God  that  I  bap- 
tized   none   of  you,   except   Crisp  us   and  Gains ; 

15  (15)  lest  any  one  should  say,  that  I  baptized  in  my 

16  own  name.  (16)  I  moreover  baptized  the  house- 
hokF  of  Stephanas :  but  further,  I  know  not  that  I 

17  baptized  any  other. — (17)  For  Messiah  did  not  send 
me  to  baptize,  but  to  preach  ;  not  ■^nth  wisdom  of 
words,  lest  the  cross  of  Messiah  should  be  inefficient. 

18  (18)  For  a  discourse  concerning  the  cross  is,  to  them 
who   perish,  foolishness ;  but  to  us  who  live,s  it 

19  is  the  energy  of  God.  (19)  For  it  is  written:  I 
will  destroy  the  wisdom  of  the  wise ;  and  I  will 

20  dissipate  the  intelligence  of  the  sagacious.  (20) 
Where  is  the  wise  ?  Or  where  is  the  scribe  ?  Or 
where  is  the  disputant  of  this  world  ?  Lo,  hath  not 
God  showed,  that  the  wisdom  of  this  world  is  folly? 

21  (21)  For  in  the  wisdom  of  God,  because  the  world 
by  wisdom  knew  not  God,  it  pleased  God,  by  the 
foolishness  of  preaching,  to  quicken^  them  who 
believe.  (22)  Because  the  Jews  ask  for  signs,  and 
the  Gentiles'  demand  wisdom.  (23)  But  we  preach 
Messiah  as  crucified  ;  [which  is]  a  stumbling-block 
to  the  Jews,    and   foolishness  to    the    Gentiles 

24  (24)  but  to  them  who  are  called,  both  Jews  and 
Gentiles, i  Messiah  is  the  energy  of  God,  and  the 
wisdom  of  God.  (25)  Because  the  foolishness  of 
God,  is  wiser  than  men  ;  and  the  feebleness  of  God, 
is  stronger  than  men. — (26)  For  look  also  at  your 
calling,  my  Brethren ;  that  not  many  among  you 
are  wise,  according  to  the  flesh ;    and  not  many 


22 
23 


25 

26 


''  or,  unto. 


^  or,  word,  or, 
discourse. 


Sy.  house. 


s  or,  are  saved. 


^  or,  save. 

'  Sy. 
Aramaeans. 


804 


1   CORINTHIANS,    II. 


1=  Sy.  ]Ln  n  .?i 

>Sy. 

12.ajt_ij_o 


*  or,  philosophic 
suhiilty. 

•"  Sy.  judge. 


Sy.  lALnr:ij 
Sy. 


among  you  are  mighty,  and  not  many  among  you 
are  of  high  birth.     (27)  But  God  hath  chosen  the  27 
fooHsh  ones  of  the  world,  to  shame  the  wise  ;  and 
he  hath  chosen  the  feeble  ones  of  the  world,  to 
shame  the  mighty ;  (28)  and  he  hath  chosen  those  28 
of  humble  birth  in  the  world,  and  the  despised,  and 
them  who  are  nothing,  to  bring  to  naught  them 
who  are  something:  (29)  so  that  no  flesh  might  29 
glory  before  him.     (30)  And  ye,  moreover,  are  of  30 
him  in   Jesus  Messiah ;    who  hath  become  to  us 
wisdom  from  God,  and  righteousness'^  and  sanctifi- 
cation,'  and  redemption  :"^  (31)  according  to  that  31 
which  is  written :  He  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory 
in  the  Lord. 


2 


6 


And  I,  my  Brethren,  when  I  came  to  you,  did  II. 
not  preach  to  you  the  mystery  of  God  in  magnifi- 
cent speech,  nor  in  wisdom.^^  (2)  And  I  did  not 
govern''  myself  among  j^ou,  as  if  I  knew  any  thing, 
except  only  Jesus  Messiah ;  and  him  also  as  cru- 
cified. (3)  And  in  much  fear  and  much  trembling, 
was  I  with  you.  (4)  And  my  speech  and  my 
preaching  were  not  with  the  persuasiveness  of  the 
discourses  of  wisdom  ;  but  with  the  demonstration 
of  the  Spirit,  and  with  power  :  (5)  that  your  faith 
might  not  arise  from  the  wisdom  of  men,  but  from 
the  power  of  God. — (6)  Yet  we  do  speak  wisdom, « 
among  the  perfect ;  the  wisdom  not  of  this  world, 
nor  of  the  potentates'^  of  this  world,  who  will  come 
to  naught.  (7)  But  we  speak  the  wisdom  of  God, 
in  a  mystery ;  the  wisdom  which  was  hidden,  and 
which  God  predetermined  before  the  world  was, 
for  our  glory :  (8)  which  no  one  of  the  potentates 
of  this  world  knew ;  for  had  they  known  it,  they 
would  not  have  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory. 
(9)  But,  as  it  is  written  :  The  eye  hath  not  seen, 
nor  hath  the  ear  heard,  nor  hath  it  entered  into  the 
heart  of  man,  that  which  God  hath  prepared  for 
those  who  love  him.  (10)  But  God  hath  revealed 
it  to  us,  by  his  Spirit ;  for  the  Spirit  exploreth  all 
things,  even  the  profound  things  of  God.  (11)  For  11 
what  man  is  there,  who  knoweth  that  which  is  in  a 
man,  except  it  be  the  spirit  of  the  man,  which  is  in 
him  ?  So  also,  that  which  is  in  God,  no  one  know- 
'eth,  except  the  Spirit  of  God.  (12)  Now  wc  have 
received,  not  the  spirit  of  the  world,  but  the  Spirit 


9 


10 


12 


1    CORINTHIANS,    III. 


305 


wliich  is  from  God ;  that  we  miglit  knoAv  the  free 

13  gifts,  which  are  given  to  us  bj  God.  (13)  Which 
things  we  also  speak;  not  in  the  teaching  of  the 
words  of  man's  wisdom,  but  in  the  teaching  of  the 
Spirit;  and  we  compare  spirituals  with  spirituals. 

14  (14)  For  a  man  in  his  natural  self,^  receiveth  not 
spirituals ;  for  they  are  foolishness  to  him.  Neither 
can  he  know  them ;  for  they  are  discerned  by  the 

15  Spirit.     (15)  But  he  that  is  spiritual,  judgeth  of  all 

16  things:  and  he  is  judged  of  by  no  one.  (16)  For 
who  hath  known  the  mind  of  the  Lord,  that  he 
should  instruct  him  ?  But  wg  have  the  mind  of 
Messiah. 

III.  And  1,  my  Brethren,  could  not  talk  with  you,  as 
with  spiritual!^  [persons],  but  as  with  the  carnal, ^ 

2  as  with  babes  in  Messiah.  (2)  I  gave  you  milk, 
and  did  not  give  you  solid  food :  for  ye  were  not 
then  able  to  receive  it ;  and  even  now,  ye  are  not 

3  able.  (3)  For  ye  are  still  in  the  flesh. <=  For,  as 
there  are  among  you  envying,  and  contention,  and 
parties,  are  ye  not  carnal,  and  walking  in  the  flesh? 

4  (4)  For,  while  one  of  you  saith,  I  am  of  Paul ;  and 
another  saith,  I  am  of  Apollos;  are  ye  not  carnal? 

5  — (5)  For,  who  is  Paul,  or  who  is  Apollos,  but  the 
ministers  by  whom  ye  believed,  each  one  as  the 

6  Lord  gave  to  him?      (6)  I  planted,  and  Apollos 

7  watered  ;  but  God  produced  the  growth.  (7)  Not 
therefore  he  that  planted,  is  to  be  accounted  of,  nor 
he  that  watered,  but  God  who  produced  the  growth. 

8  (8)  And  he  that  j^lanted,  and  he  that  watered  are 
on  a  par  ;d  each  receiveth  his  reward,  according 

9  to  his  labor.     (9)  For  we  labor  with  God  :  and  ye 

10  are  God's  husbandry,  and  God's  edifice.  (10)  Ac- 
cording to  the  grace  of  God  which  was  given  me,  I 
laid  the  foundation  like  a  wise  architect ;  and 
another  buildeth  on  it.     But  let  each  one  see,  how 

11  he  buildeth  on  it.  (11)  For  any  other  foundation 
can  no  man  lay,  different  from  that  which  is  laid, 

12  which  is  Jesus  Messiah.  (12)  And  if  any  one 
buildeth  on  this  foundation,  either  gold,  or  silver, 
or  precious  stones,  or  wood,  or  ha}^,  or  stubble ; 

13  (13)  the  work  of  each  will  be  exposed  to  view  ;  for 
the  day  will  expose  it ;  because  it  is  to  be  tested  by 
fire ;  and  the  fire  will  disclose  the  work  of  each,  of 

14  what  sort  it  is.    (14)  And  that  builder  whose  work 


Sy. 

Gr.  £v  4'^X?'' 


Sy.  'jjL^jO') 
Sy.  Uf^H^ 

Sy.  :<-n'--,^ 


^  Sy.  are  one. 


306 


1   CORINTHIANS,    IV. 


18 


19 

20 

21 
22 


shall  endure,  will  receive  his  reward.     (15)  And  15 
he,  whose  work  shall  burn  up,  will  suffer  loss ; 
yet  himself  will  escape ;   but  it  will  be,  as  from 
the  fire. — (16)  Know  ye  not,  that  ye  are  the  temple  16 
of  God?  and  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in 
you?    (17)  Whoever  shall  mar  the  temple  of  God,  17 
God  will  mar  him :  for  the  temple  of  God  is  holy, 
which  [temple]  ye  arc.     (18)  Let  no  one  deceive 
himself.     Whoever  among  you  thinketh  that  he  is 
wise  in  this  world,  let  him  become  a  fool,  that  he 
may  be  wise.     (19)  For  the  wisdom  of  this  world 
is  fatuity  with  God  :  for  it  is  written,  He  catcheth 
the  wise  in  their  own  craftiness.     (20)  And  again : 
The  Lord  knoweth  the  devices  of  the  wise,  that 
they  are  vain.     (21)  Wherefore,  let  no  one  glory 
in  men :  for  all  things  are  yours ;    (22)  whether 
Paul,  or  Apollos,  or  Cephas,  or  the  world,  or  life, 
or  death,  or  things  present,  or  things  to  come  ;  all 
things  are  yours :  (23)  and  ye  are  Messiah's,  and  23 
Messiah  is  God's. — [IV.]  Let  us  be  so  accounted  IV. 
of  by  you,  as  the  servants*  of  Messiah,  and  the 
stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God.     (2)  Now  it  is     2 
required  of  stewards,  that  each  be  found  faithful. 
(3)  But  to  me,  it  is  a  light  matter  to  be  judged  of     3 
by  you,  or  by  any  man  whatever ;  nay,  I  am  no 
judge  of  myself     (4)  (For  I  am  not  conscious  in     4 
myself  of  any  thing  [flagrant] ;  yet  I  am  not  by 
this  justified ;  for  the  Lord  is  my  judge.)    (5)  There-     5 
fore  pronounce  not  judgments  before  the  time,  [or] 
until  the  Lord  come,  who  will  pour  light  upon  the 
hidden  things  of  darkness,  and  will  make  manifest 
the  thoughts  of  [men's]  hearts :  and  then  will  each 
one  have  [due]  praise  from  God. 

These  things,  my  Brethren,  I  have  stated  con- 
cerning the  person  of  myself  and  of  Apollos,  for 
your  sakes ;  that,  in  us,  ye  might  learn  not  to 
think  [of  men],  above  what  is  written ;  and  that 
no  one  might  exalt  himself  in  comparison  with  liis 
fellow,  on  account  of  any  person.  (7)  For  who 
exploreth  thee?  Or  what  hast  thou,  which  thou 
didst  not  receive  ?  And  if  thou  receivedst  it,  why 
gloriest   thou,    as   if   thou   didst   not  receive  it? 

(8)  Now  ye  are  yourselves  full,  and  enriched  ;  and, 
without  us,  are  on  thrones !  And  I  wish  ye  were 
enthroned  ;    that  we  also  might  reign  with  you. 

(9)  But  I  suppose,  that  God  hath  placed  us  legates 


6 


9 


1    CORINTHIANS,    V. 


507 


the  last,  as  for  death ;    since  we  have  become  a 
spectacle  to   the   world,  to   angels   and  to   men. 

10  (10)  We  are  fools,  on  account  of  Messiah ;  but  ye 
are  wise  in  Messiah  !     We  are  feeble  ;  but  ye  are 

11  strong !  Ye  are  lauded,  we  are  contemned.  (11) 
Unto  this  hour,  we  hunger,  and  thirst,  and  are 
naked,  and  are  buffeted,  and  have  no  permanent 

12  home :  (12)  and  we  toil,  working  with  our  own 
hands :  they  defame  us,  and  we  bless  :  they  persecute 

13  us,  and  we  endure  it :  (13)  they  revile  us,  and  we 
entreat  them :  we  are  as  the  filth  of  the  world,  and 

14  the  expiation  for  all  men,  up  to  this  time. — (14)  I 
write  these  things,  not  to  shame  you  ;  but  I  instruct 

15  you,  as  dear  children.  (15)  For  though  ye  have 
a  myriad  of  teachers  in  Messiah,  yet  not  many 
fathers  ;  for  in  Jesus  Messiah,  I  have  begotten  you 

16  by  preaching.^     (16)  I  beseech  you,  therefore,  that 

17  ye  be  like  me. — (17)  For  this  cause  have  I  sent  to 
3^ou  Timothy,  who  is  my  beloved  son,  and  faithful 
in  the  Lord,  that  he  might  bring  to  your  recollection 
my  ways  in  Messiah,  agreeably  to  what  I  teach  in 

18  all  the  churches.  (18)  Now  some  of  you  are  in- 
flated, as  though  I  would  not  [dare]  come  to  you. 

19  (19)  But  I  will  come  to  you  speedily,  if  God  be 
willing  :  and  I  will  know, — not  the  speech^  of  them 

20  who  exalt  themselves,  but  their  power :  (20)  for 
the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  in  word,  but  in  power. 

21  (21)  What  will  ye  ?  Shall  I  come  to  you  with 
the  rod,  or  with  love  and  a  gentle  spirit? 

V.  In  short,  a-  it  is  reported,  there  is  whoredom 
among  you ;  and  such  whoredom  as  is  not  even 
named  among  the  heathen,  that  a  son  should  even 

2  take  the  wife  of  his  flither.  (2)  And  ye  are  infla- 
ted, and  have  not  rather  sitten  down  in  grief,  that 
he  who  hath  done  this  deed  might  be  separated 

3  from  you.  (3)  And  I,  while  distant  from  you  in 
body  but  present  with  you  in  spirit,  have  already, 
as  if  present,  judged  him  who  perpetrateth  this 

4  deed;  (4)  that  ye  all  assemble  together,  in  the 
name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  ]\Iessiah,  and  I  with  you 
in  spirit,  together  with  the  energy^  of  our  Lord 

5  Jesus  Messiah ;  (5)  and  that  ye  deliver  him  over 
to  Satan,  for  the  destruction  of  the  flesh, "  that  in 
spirit  he  may  have  life,  in  the  day  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Messiah. 


''  or,  (lie  Gospel. 


Sy.  word. 


Sy.  ]nCD 


Sy.  ni\  .  v» 


or,  body. 


308 


1   CORINTHIANS,    VI. 


Sy.  ;>c>|j 


«  alii:  unleav- 
eiied. 


or,  toicked  per- 
son. 

Sy.]vo\s 
Sy.  IdJJIo 


Your  glorying  is  not  praiseworthy. <J     Know  ye 
not,  that  a  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  mass? 

(7)  Purge  out  from  you  the  old  leaven,  that  ye 
may  be  a  new  mass,  as  ye  are  unleavened.  For 
our  passover  is  the  Messiah,  who  Avas  slain  for  us. 

(8)  Therefore  let  us  celebrate  the  festival,  not  with 
the  old  leaven,  nor  with  the  leaven  of  wickedness 
and  bitterness,  but  with  the  leaven«>  of  purity  and 
sanctity. — (9)  I  wrote  to  you  by  letter,  not  to  com- 
mingle with  whoremongers.  (10)  But  I  say  not, 
with  the  whoremongers  who  are  in  the  world,  nor 
[speak  1]  of  the  avaricious,  or  of  the  rapacious,  or 
of  the  idol-worshippers,  otherwise  ye  would  be 
obliged  to  go  out  of  the  world.  (11)  But  this  is 
what  I  wrote  to  you,  that  ye  commingle  not,  if  any 
one  is  called  a  brother,  and  is  a  whoremonger,  or 
avaricious,  or  an  idol- worshipper,  or  a  railer,  or  a 
drunkard,  or  rapacious, — with  him  who  is  such, 
not  even  to  eat  bread.  (12)  For  what  business 
have  I  to  judge  them  who  are  without?  But 
those  within  the  bod}^,  judge  ye,  (13)  and  those 
without,  God  judgeth  ;  and  remove  ye  thcAvicked- 
ness''  from  among  you. 


9 
10 


11 


12 


13 


Dare  any  of  you,  when  he  hath  a  controvers}'-  YI. 
with  his  brother,  litigate  before  the  iniquitous,  and 
not  before  the  sanctified?     (2)  Or  know  ye  not,     2 
that  the  sanctified  will  judge  the  world  ?=^     And  if 
the  world  will  be  judged  by  you,  are  ye  unfit  to 
decide  trivial  causes?     (3)  Know  ye  not,  that  we     3 
shall  judge  angels  ?•'     How  much  more  things  that 
are  of  the  world  ?    (4)  But  if  ye  have  a  controversy     4 
about  a  worldly  matter,  seat  ye  on  the  bench  for 
you  .those  who   are   contemned   in    the    church ! 

(5)  For  shame  to  you  I  say  [it].     So,  there  is  not     5 
even  one  wise  man  among  you,  who  is  comj^etcnt 

to  do  equity  between  a  brother  and  his  brother : 

(6)  but  a  brother  litigateth  with  his  brother,  and     6 
also  before  them  that  believe  not !     (7)  Now  there-     7 
fore  ye  condemn  yourselves,  in  that  ye  have  litiga- 
tion one  with  another.     For  why  do  ye  not  rather 
suffer  wrong  ?    why  not    rather    be    defrauded  ? 
(8)  But  ye  yourselves  commit  wrong,  and  ye  de-     8 
fraud  even  your  brethren.    (9)  Or  do  ye  not  know, 
that  the  unrighteous  will  not  inherit  the  kingdom 
of  God  ?    Do  not  mistake  ;  neither  whoremonsrers, 


9 


1    CORINTHIANS,    VII. 


309 


nor    idol- worshippers,  nor  adulterers,  nor  debau- 

10  chees,  nor  liers  with  males,  (10)  nor  the  avaricious, 
nor  thieves,  nor  drunkards,  nor  railers,  nor  extor- 

11  tioners, — will  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God.  (11) 
And  these  things  have  been  in  some  of  you  :  but 
ye  are  washed,  and  are  sanctified,  and  made-  righ- 
teous, in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah, 
and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God. 

12  Every  thing  is  in  my  power  :<=  but  every  thing  is 
not  profitable  to  me.  Every  thing  is  in  my  power; 
but  none  [of  them]  shall  have  dominion  over  me. 

13  (13)  Food  is  for  the  belly  ;  and  the  belly  is  for 
food  ;  but  God  will  bring  them  both  to  naught. 
But  the  body  is    not  for  whoredom,  but  for  our 

14  Lord;  and  our  Lord  for  the  body.  (1-1)  And  God 
hath  raised  up  our  Lord  ;  and  he  will  raise  us  up, 

15  by  his  power.  (15)  Know  ye  not,  that  your  bodies 
are  the  members  of  the  Messiah  ?  Shall  one  take 
a  member  of  the  Messiah,  and  make  it  the  member 

16  of  a  harlot?  Far  be  it.  (16)  Or  know  ye  not, 
that  whoever  joineth  himself  to  a  harlot,  is  one  body 
[with  her]?     For  it  is  said.  They  twain  shall  be 

17  one  body.     (17)  But  he  that  joineth  himself  to  our 

18  Lord,  is  with  him  one  spirit.  (18)  Flee  whoredom. 
For  every  [other]  sin  which  a  man  committeth,  is 
external  to  his  body ;    but   he   that   committeth 

19  whoredom,  sinneth  against  his  own  bod3^  (19)  Or 
know  ye  not,  that  your  body  is  the  temple  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  who  abideth"^  in  you,  whom  ye  have 
received  from  God  ?     And  ye  are  not  your  own. 

20  (20)  For  ye  are  bought^  with  a  price.  Therefore, 
glorify  ye  God,  with  your  body,  and  with  j^our 
si^irit,  which  are  God's. 

YIL  And  concerning  the  things  of  which  ye  wrote  to 
me,  it  is  praiseworthy-^  for  a  man  not  to  approach 

2  a  woman.  (2)  But,  on  account  of  whoredom,  let 
each  have  his  own  wife  ;  and  let  a  woman  have 

3  her  own  husband.  (3)  And  let  the  man  render 
to    his  wife    the  kindness  which  is  due  ;    and  so 

4  also  the  woman  to  her  husband.  (4)  The  woman 
is  not  the  sovereign''  over  her  body,  but  her  hus- 
band :  so  also  the  man  is  not  the  sovereign  over 

5  his  body,  but  the  wife.  (5)  Therefore,  deprive  not 
one  another,  except  when  ye  both  consent,  at  the 
time  ye  devote  yourselves  to  fasting  and  prayer ; 


cSy. 


Sy.  "JAoLj 

Sy. 


Sy.  it<^  9 


Sy.  ]4A^ 


310 


1    CORINTHIANS,    VII. 


=  Sy. 


Sy.^_^5 


Sy. 

Sy.  "UU 


and  return  again  to  the  same  disposition,  that  Satan 
tempt  you  not  because  of  the  concupiscence   of 
3''0ur  body.     (6)  But  this  I  say,  as  to  weak  per-     6 
sons,  not  of  positive  precept. <=      (7)  For  I  would     7 
that  all  men  might  be  like  me  in   purity.      But 
every'  man  is  endowed  with  his  gift  of  God ;  one 
thus,  and  another  so.     (8)  And  I  say  to  them  wlio     8 
have  no  wives,  and  to  widows,  that  it  is  advanta- 
geous to  them  to  remain  as  I  am.     (9)  But  if  they     9 
cannot  endure  [it],  let  them  marry  :  for  it  is  more 
profitable  to  take  a  wife,  than  to  burn  with  concu- 
piscence.    (10)  And  on  them  who  have  wives,  I  10 
enjoin, — not   I,  but   my  Lord, — that  the  woman 
separate  not  from  her  husband.     (11)  And  if  she  11 
separate,  let  her  remain  without  a  husband,  or  be 
reconciled  to  her  husband ;  and  let  not  the  man 
put  away  his  wife.     (12)  And  to  the  rest,  say  I, —  12 
I,  not  my  Lord, — that  if  there  be  a  brother,  who 
hath  a  wife  that  belie veth  not,  and  she  is  disposed 
to   dwell  with   him,  let   him   not  put  her  away. 
(13)  And  that  woman,  who  hath  a  husband  that  13 
believeth  not,  and  he  is  disposed  to  dwell  with  her, 
let  her  not  forsake  her  husband.      (1-1)  For   the  14 
husband  who   believeth  not,  is  sanctified  by  the 
wife  that  believeth ;  and  the  wife  who  believeth 
not,  is  sanctified  by  the  husband  that  believeth : 
otherwise  their  children  would  be  impure ;  but  now 
are  they  pure.'^     (15)  But  if  the  unbeliever  sepa-  15 
rateth,  let  him  separate :  A  brother  or  sister  is  not  in 
bondage  in  such  cases:  it  is  to  peace,  God  hath  called 
us.     (16)  For  how  knowest  thou,  O  wife,  whether  16 
thou  wilt  procure  life  to  thy  husband  ?e     Or,  thou 
husband,  knowest  thou,  whether  thou  wilt  procure 
lifcf  to   thy  wife?     (17)  Every  one,  however,  as  17 
the  Lord  hath  distributed  to  him,  and  every  one  as 
God  hath  called  him,  so  let  him  walk.     And  also 
thus  I  enjoin  upon  all  the  churches.     (18)  Is  a  cir-  18 
cumcised  person  called,  let  him  not  revert  to  uncir- 
cumcision :  and  if  one  uncircumcised  be  called,  let 
him  not  become  circumcised.      (19)    For  circum-  19 
cision  is  nothing,  neither  is  uncircumcision  ;  but  the 
keeping  of  God's  commands.     (20)  Let  every  one  20 
continue  in  the  vocation,  in  which  he  was  called. 
(21)  If  thou  wert  called,  being  a  servant ;  let  it  not  21 
trouble  thee.     But  if  thou  canst  be    made   free, 
choose  it  rather  than  to  serve.     (22)  For  he  that  22 


1   CORINTHIANS,   VII. 


311 


23 

24 


25 


27 


28 


29 


is  called  by  our  Lord,  being  a  servant,  is  God's 
freedman :  likewise,  he  that  is  called,  being  a  free 
man,  is  the  Messiah's  servant.  (23)  Ye  are  bought 
with  a  price  ;  become  not  the  servants  of  men. 
(24)  Let  everj  one,  my  Brethren,  continue  with 
God,  in  whatever  [state]  he  was  called. 

And  concerning  virginity,  I  have  no  precept 
from  God ;  but  I  give  counsel,  as  a  man  who  hath 
obtained  mercy  from  God  to  be  a  believer. 
26  (26)  And  I  think  this  is  suitable,^  on  account  of 
the  necessity  of  the  times ;  it  is  advantageous  for  a 
man  to  remain  as  he  is.  (27)  Art  thou  bound  to  a 
wife  ?  Seek  not  a  release.  Art  thou  free  from  a 
wife  ?  Seek  not  a  wife.  (28)  But  if  thou  takest 
a  wife,  thou  sinnest  not.  x\nd  if  a  maiden  is  given 
to  a  husband,  she  sinneth  not.  But  they  who  are 
such,  will  have  trouble  in  the  body :  but  I  am  for- 
bearing to  you.  (29)  And  this  I  say,  my  Brethren, 
that  the  time  to  come  is  short ;  so  that  they  who 

30  have  wives,  should  be  as  if  they  had  none  ;  (30)  and 
they  who  Aveep,  as  if  they  Avept  not ;  and  they  who 
rejoice,  as  if  they  rejoiced  not ;  and  they  who  buy, 

31  as  if  they  acquired  not;  (31)  and  those  occupied 
with  this  world,  not  going  beyond  the  just  using : 
for  the  foshion'i    of  this  world  is  passing  away. 

32  (32)  And  therefore  I  wish  you  to  be  without 
solicitude.  For  he  who  hath  not  a  wife,  consider- 
eth  the  things  of  his  Lord,  how  he  may  please  his 
Lord.  (33)  And  he  who  hath  a  wife,  is  anxious 
about  the  world,  how  he   may  please   his  wife. 

(34)  There  is  a  difference  also  between  a  wife  and 
a  maiden.  She  who  is  without  a  husband,  think- 
eth  of  things  pertaining  to  her  Lord,  that  she  may 
be  holy  in  her  body  and  in  her  spirit.  But  she 
who  hath  a  husband,  thinketh  of  things  pertaining 
to  the  world,  how  she  may  please  her  husband. 

(35)  And  this  I  say  for  your  advantage  ;  I  am  not 
laying  a  snare  for  you  ;  but  that  ye  may  be  faith- 
ful towards  your  Lord,  in  a  suitable  manner,  while 
not  minding  worldly  things.  (36)  But  if  any  one 
thinketh  that  there  is  reproach,  on  account  of  his 
maiden  [daughter],  because  she  hath  passed  her 
time,  and  he  hath  not  presented  her  to  a  husband, 
[and]  it  be  fitting  that  he  present  her;  let  him  do 
what  he  desireth,  he  sinneth  not;  let  her  be  mar- 
ried.     (37)    But  he  who  hath  firmly  determined 


33 


34 


35 


36 


f  Sy.  1;  1  <^  » 


Sy. 


87 


312 


1   CORIxNTHIANS,    VIII. 


'  Sy.  ;  »  c^  • 

^  Sy.  A^l^.iA.. 
IA<=^.»,  or, 
7nore  com- 
mendably. 


1.  e.  conscien- 
tiously. 


^  Sy. 


^ 


in  bis  own  mind,  and  nothing  compelleth  him,  and 
he  can  act  his  own  pleasure,  and  he  so  judgeth  in 
his  heart,  that   he  keep  his  maiden  [daughter], 
he  doeth  commendably.'     (38)  And  therefore,  he  38 
who  prcsenteth  his  maiden  [daughter],  doeth  com- 
mendably ;  and  he  who  presenteth  not  his  maiden 
[daugliter],  doeth   very   commendably. ^      (39)  A  39 
woman,  while  her  husband  liveth,  is  bound  by  the 
law  ;  but  if  her  husband  sleepeth  [in  death],  she  is 
free  to  marry  whom  she  pleaseth,  [yet]  only  in  the 
Lord.     (40)  But  she  is  happier,  in  my  opinion,  if   40 
she  remain  so :  and  I  think  also,  that  I  have  the 
Spirit  of  God. 

And  concerning  sacrifices  to  idols,  we  know,  VIII. 
that  in  all  of  us  there  is  knowledge ;  and  knowledge 
inflateth,  but  love  editieth.     (2)  And  if  any  one     2 
thinketh  that  he  knoweth  any  thing,  he   knoweth 
nothing  yet,  as  he  ought  to  know  [it].     (3)  But  if     3 
any  one  loveth  God,  that  man  is  known  of  him. 
(4)  As  to  the  eating  of  the  sacrifices  of  idols,  there-     4 
fore,  we  know  that  an  idol  is  nothing  in  the  world ; 
and  that  there  is  no  other  God,  but  one.     (5)  For     5 
although  there  are  what  are  called  gods,  -whether 
in  heaven,  or  on  earth,  (as  there  are  gods  many, 
and  lords  many,)  (6)  yet  to  us,  on  our  part,  there     6 
is  one  God,  the  Father,  from  whom  are  all  things, 
and  we  in  him ;  and  one  Lord,  Jesus  the  Messiah, 
by  whom  are    all  things,    and   we  also  by    him. 

(7)  But  there  is  not   [this]   knowledge  in    every     7 
man  ;  for  there  are  some,  who,  to  the  present  time, 

in  their  conscience,^  eat  [it]  as  an  offering  to  idols  ; 
and  because  their  conscience  is  weak,  it  is  defiled, 

(8)  But  food  doth  not  bring  us  near  to  God ;  for  if     8 
we  eat,  we  do  not  abound ;  and  if  we  eat  not,  we 
are  not  in  want.     (9)  See  to  it,  however,  lest  this     9 
your  authority''  become  a  stumbling-block  to  the 
weak.     (10)  For  if  one  should  see  thee  in  whom  10 
there  is  knowledge,  reclining  in  the  temple  of  idols, 
will  not  his  conscience,  seeing  he  is  a  weak  person, 

be  encouraged  to  eat  what  is  sacrified  ?     (11)  And  11 
by  thy  knowledge,  he  who  is  feeble,  and  on  account 
of  whom  the  Messiah  died,  will  perish.     (12)  And  12 
if  ye  thus  sin  against  your  brethren,  and  wound 
the  consciences  of  tlie  feeble,  ye  sin  against  the 
Messiah.     (13)  Wherefore,  if  food  is  a  stumbling-  13 


1    CORINTHIANS,    IX. 


313 


block  to  my  brother,  I  will  for  ever  eat  no  flesh, 
lest  I  should  be  a  stumbling-block  to  my  brother. 

IX,  Am  I  not  a  free  man?  Or,  am  I  not  a  legate ?=" 
Or,  have  I  not  seen  Jesus  Messiah  our  Lord  ?     Or, 

2  have  ye  not  been  my  work  in  my  Lord  ?  (2)  And 
if  I  have  not  been  a  legate  to  others,  yet  I  have 
been  so  to  you ;  and  ye  are  the  seal  of  my  legate- 

3  ship.      (3)    And  [my]  apology  to  my  judgers,  is 

4  this:  (4)  Have  we  not  authority,^   to  eat  and   to 

5  di'ink?  (5)  Or  have  we  not  authority  to  carry 
about  with  us  a  sister  as  a  wife  ;  just  as  the  other 
legates,  and  the  brothers  of  our  Lord,  and  as  Ce- 

6  phas  ?     (6)  Or  I  only,  and  Barnabas,  have  we  no 

7  right  to  forbear  labor  ?  (7)  AVho,  that  serveth  in 
war,  [doth  so]  at  his  own  expense  ?  Or  who,  that 
jDlanteth  a  vineyard,  eateth  not  of  its  fruits?  Or 
who,  that  tendeth  sheep,  eateth  not  of   the  milk 

8  of  his  flocks  ?      (8)    Is  it  as  a  man,  I  say  these 

9  things?  Behold,  the  law  also  saith  them.  (9)  For 
it  is  written  in  the  law  of  Moses,  Thou  shalt  not 
muzzle  the  ox  that  thresheth.'^     Hath  God  regard 

10  for  oxen  ?  (10)  But  manifest  it  is,  for  whose  sake 
he  said  it.  And  indeed,  for  our  sakes  it  was  writ- 
ten :  because  the  plougher  ought  to  plough  in  hope, 

11  and  the  thresher  in  hope  of  fruit.  (11)  If  we  have 
sowed  among  you  the  things  of  the  Spirit,  is  it  a 
great  matter,  if  we  reap  from  you  the  things  of 

12  the  body  ?  (12)  And  if  others  have  this  preroga- 
tive*i  over  you,  doth  it  not  belong  still  more  to  us  ? 
Yet  we  have  not  used  this  prerogative;  but  we 
have  endured  everj^  thing,  that  we  might  in  noth- 
ing  impede    the    announcement   of  the   Messiah. 

13  (13)  Know  ye  not,  that  they  who  serve  in  a  tem- 
ple,e  are  fed  from  the  temple?  And  they  who 
serve   at   the    altar,    participate   with    the    altar? 

14  (14)  Thus  also  hath  our  Lord  commanded,  that 
they  who  proclaim  his  gospel,  should  live  by  his 

15  gospel.  (15)  But  I  have  used  none  of  these  things : 
and  I  write  not,  that  it  may  be  so  done  to  me  ;  for 
it  would  be  better  for  me  to  actually  die,  than  that 

16  any  one  should  make  void  my  glorying.  (16) 
For  while  I  preach,  I  have  no  [ground  of]  glory- 
ing ;  because  necessity  is  laid  upon  me,  and  woe 

17  to  me,  if  I  preach  not.  (17)  For  if  I  do  this  vol- 
untarily, there  is  a  reward  for  me  :  but  if  involun- 


Sy.  ]  t-k  »\  » 


Sy.  ^.^V^ 


Sy.  treadetli. 


^Sy."U4\< 


Q-» 


Sy.  a  holy 
house. 


314 


1   CORINTHIANS,    X. 


Sy. 


v:f 


Sy.  W 


>•  Sy. 

Gr.  ayuMa. 
'  or,  mmd. 


vjp. 


Sy.  o,^r>.v 


Sy. 


Gr. 


TJ*05. 


tarily,  a  stewardship  is  intrusted  to  me.    (18)  What  18 
then  is  my  reward?     [It  is,]  that  when  I  preach,  I 
make  the  announcement  of  the  Messiah  without 
cost,  and  use  not  the  prerogative  given  me  in  tlie 
gospel.^     (19)  Being  free  from  them  all,  I  have  19 
made  myself  servant  to  every  man ;  that  I  might 
gain  many  :  (20)  and  with  the  Jews,  I  was  as  a  20 
jQ\y^  that  I  might  gain  the  Jews ;  and  with  those 
under  the  law,  I  was  as  under  the  law,  that  I  might 
gain  them  who  are  under  the  law;    (21)   and  to  21 
those  Avho  have  not  the  law,  I  was  as  Avithout  the 
law,  (although  I  am  not  without  law  to  God,  but 
under  the  law  of  the  Messiah,)  that  I  might  gain 
them  that  are  without  the  law.     (22)  I  Avas  with  22 
the  weak,  as  weak,  that  I  might  gain  the  weak  :  I 
was  all  things  to  all  men,  that  I  might  vivify^ 
every  one.     (23)  And  this  I  do,  that  I  may  par-  23 
ticipate  in  the  announcement. — (24)  Know  ye  not,  24 
that  they  who  run  in  the  stadium,  run  all  of  them ; 
yet  it  is  one  who  gaineth  the  victor3^     Run  ye,  so 
as  to  attain.     (25)  For  every  one  who  engageth  in  25 
the  contest,''  restraineth  his  desires'  in  every  thing. 
And  they  run,  to  obtain  a  crown  that  perisheth ; 
but  we,  one  that  perisheth  not,     (26)  I  therefore  so  26 
run,  not  as  for  something  unknown ;    and  I   so 
struggle,  not  as  struggling  against  air:^  (27)  but  27 
I  subdue  my  body,  and  reduce  it  to  servitude  ;  lest, 
when  I  have  preached  to  others,  I  myself  should 
be  a  reprobate. 

And,  my  Brethren,  I  would  have  you  know,  that  X. 
our  fathers  were  all  of  them  under  the  cloud,  and 
they  all  passed  through  the  sea ;    (2)    and  they     2 
were  all  baptized^  by  Moses,  in  the  cloud  and  in 
the  sea ;   (3)    and  they  all  ate  the  same  spiritual     3 
food ;  (4)  and  they  all  drank  the   same  sj)iritual     4 
drink ;  for  they  drank  from  the  spiritual  rock  that 
attended  them,  and  that  rock  was  the  Messiah. 
(5)  But  with  a  multitude  of  them,  God  was  not     5 
pleased ;  for  they  fell  in  the  wilderness.     (6)  Now     6 
these  things  were  an  example'*   for  us,  that  we 
should  not  hanker  after  evil  things  as  they  hank- 
ered.    (7)  Neither  should  we  serve  idols,  as  some     7 
of  them  served ;  as  it  is  written.  The  people  sat 
down  to  eat  and  to  drink,  and  rose  up  to  sport. 
(8)  Neither  let  us  commit  whoredom,  as  some  of     8 


1   CORINTHIANS,    X. 


815 


them  committed  ;  and  there  fell  in  one  day  twenty 

9  and  three  thousand.     (9)  Neither  let  us  tempt  the 

Messiah,  as  some  of  them  tempted  ;  and  serpents 

10  destroyed  them.  (10)  Neither  murmur  ye,  as  some 
of  them  murmured ;    and   they  perished  by  the 

11  destroyer.^  (11)  All  these  things  which  befell 
them,  were  for  an  example  to  us ;  and  they  are 
written  for  our  instruction,  on  whom  the  end  of  the 

12  world^^  hath  come.     (12)  Wherefore,  let  him  who 

13  thinketh  he  standeth,  beware  lest  he  fall.  (13)  No 
trial  Cometh  on  you,  but  what  pertaineth  to  men  : 
and  God  is  flxithful,  who  will  not  permit  you  to  be 
tried  beyond  your  ability,  but  will  make  an  issue 
to  your  trial,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  sustain  it. — 

14  (14)  Wherefore,  my  Beloved,  flee  from   idolatry. 

15  (15)  I  speak  as  to  the  wise ;  judge  3^e  what  I  say. 

16  (16)  The  cup  of  thanksgiving  which  we  bless,  is  it 
not  the  communion  of  the  blood  of  the  ]\ressiah  ? 
And  the  bread  which  we  break,  is  it  not  the  com- 

17  munion  of  the  body  of  the  Messiah?  (17)  As 
therefore  that  bread  is  one,  so  we  are  all  one  body ; 
for  we  all  take  to  ourselves  from  that  one  bread. 

18  (18)  Behold  the  Israel  who  are  in  the  flesh ;  are 
not  they  who  eat  the  victims,  participators  of  the 

19  altar?  (19)  What  then  do  I  say?  That  an  idol  is 
any  thing  ?    Or,  that  an  idol's  sacrifice  is  any  thing  ? 

20  No.  (20)  Butthat  what  the  Gentiles  sacrifice,  they 
sacrifice  to  demons, ^  and  not  to  God.    And  I  Avould 

21  not,  that  ye  should  be  associates  of  demons.  (21)  Ye 
cannot  drink  the  cup  of  our  Lord,  and  the  cup  of 
demons ;  and  ye  cannot  be  partakers  at  the  table 

22  of  our  Lord,  and  at  the  table  of  demons.  (22)  Or, 
would  we  sedulously  provoke  our  Lord's  jealousy? 
Are  we  stronger  than  he  ? 

23  Every  thing  is  in  my  power  •/  but  every  thing 
is  not  profitable.     Every  thing  is  in  my  power; 

24  but  every  thing  doth  not  edify.  (24)  Let  no  one 
seek    his    own  things,  but  also  the  things  of  his 

25  fellow-man.  (25)  Whatever  is  sold  in  the  flesh- 
market,  eat  ye,  without  an  inquiry  on  account  of 

26  conscience :  (26)  for  the  earth  is  the  Lord's,  in  its 

27  fullness.  (27)  And  if  one  of  the  Gentiles  invite 
you,  and  ye  are  disposed  to  go,  eat  ye  whatever  is 
set  before  you,  without  an  inquiry  on  account  of 

28  conscience.  (28)  But  if  any  one  shall  say  to  you, 
This  pertaineth  to  a  sacrifice  ;  eat  not,  for  the  sake 


=  Sy. 


Sy.  hl^ 


Sy. 


316 


1   CORINTHIANS,    XI. 


Sy. 
Aramaeans. 


^  or,  be  saved. 


Sv.  .  n>  >•> 


Sy.  IriijALD 


-^Sy. 

<>  Sy.  ]d]]Io 

®  or,  exclusive 
of. 


^Sy.  U^ 


of  him  wlio  told  jou,  and  for  conscience's  sake. 
(29)  The  conscience  1  speak  of,  is  not  your  own,  29 
but  his  who  told  you.      But  why   is  my  liberty 
judged  of,  by  the  conscience  of  others?     (30)  If  I  30 
by  grace  partake,  why  am  I  reproached  for  that, 
for  which  1  give  thanks?     (31)  If  therefore  ye  eat,  31 
or  if  ye  drink,  or  if  ye  do  any  thing,  do  all  things 
for  the  glory  of  God.     (32)  Be  ye  without  offence  32 
to   the  Jews,  and  to  the  Gentiles,^   and   to   the 
church  of  God :  (33)  even  as  I  also,  in  everj^  thinfr,  33 
please  every  man ;  and  do  not  seek  what  is  profita- 
ble to  me,  but  what  is  ]jrofitable  to  many ;  that 
they  may  live.^     [^I-]  I^e  ye  imitators  of  mc,  as  XL 
I  am  of  the  Messiah. 

Moreover  I  commend  you,  my  Brethren,  that  in     2 
all  things  ye  are  mindful  of  me,  and  that  ye  hold 
fast  the  precepts  as  I  delivered  them  to  you.     (3)     3 
And  I  would  have  you  know,  that  the  head^*  of 
every  man  is  the  Messiah,  and  the  head  of  the 
woman  is  the  man,  and  the  head  of  the  Messiah  is 
God.     (4)  Every  man,  who  prayeth  or  prophesi-     4 
eth''  with  his  head  covered,  dishonoreth  his  head. 
(5)  And  every  woman,  who  prayeth  or  prophesi-     5 
eth    with    her   head   uncovered,   dishonoreth   her 
head ;  for  she  is  on  a  level  with  her  whose  head  is 
shaven.     (6)  For  if  a  woman  be  not  covered,  let     6 
her  also  be  shorn ;  but  if  it  be  shameful   for  a 
woman  to  be  shorn  or  shaven,  let  her  be  covered. 
(7)  The  man,  indeed,  ought  not  to  cover  his  head,     7 
because  he  is  the  likeness  and  glory  of  God  :  but 
the  woman  is  the  glory  of  the  man.     (8)  For  the     8 
man  was  not  from  the  woman,  but  the  woman  from 
the  man.     (9)  Neither  was  the  man  created  for  the     9 
woman's  sake,  but  the  woman  for  the  man's  sake. 
(10)  For  this  cause  ought  the  woman  to  have  on  10 
her  head  [the  mark  of]  authority,*^  because  of  the 
angels. fi     (11)  Nevertheless,  the  man  is  not  with-  11 
out^  the  woman,  nor  the  woman  Avithout  the  man, 
in  our  Lord.     (12)  For  as  the  woman  [was]  from  12 
the  man,  so  the  man  is  by  the  woman  ;  and  every 
thing  is   from    God,      (13)  Judge  for  yourselves,  13 
among  yourselves ;  is  it  becoming,  that  a  woman 
pray  to  God  with  her  head  uncovered?     (14)  Doth  14 
not  nature^  teach  you,  that  in  a  man,  if  his  hair 
groweth  long,  it  is  a  reproach  to  him  ?     (15)  But  15 
for  a  woman,  if  her  hair  is  abundant,  it  is  a  glory 


1    CORINTHIANS,    XI. 


817 


to  her;  for  her  hair  is  given  to  her  for  a  covering. 

16  (16)  But  if  any  one  is  contentious  about  these 
things,  we  on  our  part  have  no  such  custom,  nor 
hath  the  church  of  God. 

17  This  which  I  now  enjoin,  is  not  as  praising  you; 
for  ye  have  not  made  progress,  but  have  deteriora- 

18  ted.  (18)  Because,  first ;  when  ye  assemble  in  the 
church,  there  are,  I  hear,  divisions  among  you ;  and 

19  I  partly  believe  it.  (19)  For  there  are  to  be  con- 
tentionss  among  you,  that  the  approved  among 

20  you  may  be  known.  (20)  When  therefore  ye 
come  together,  ye  eat  and  drink,  not  as  is  becom- 

21  ing  on  the  day  of  our  Lord.  (21)  But,  one  and 
another  proceedeth  to  eat  his  own  supper ;  and  one 

22  is  hungry,  and  another  is  drunken,  (22)  What ! 
have  ye  no  houses  in  which  ye  can  eat  and  drink? 
or,  despise  ye  the  church  of  God,  and  shame  them 
who  have  nothing?  What  shall  I  say  to  you? 
Shall   I   praise  you?     In  this  I  praise  you  not. 

23  (23)  For  I  have  received  from  our  Lord,  that  which 
I  imparted  to  you ;  that  our  Lord  Jesus,  on  the 

21:  night  he  was  betrayed,  took  bread,  (24)  and  blessed, 
and  brake  [it],  and  said:  "Take,  eat;  this  is  my 
body,  which  is  broken  for  your  sakes  :  thus  do  ye, 
in  remembrance  of  me."  (25)  So,  after  they  had 
supped,  he  gave  also  the  cup,  and  said :  "  This  cup 
is  the  new  testament'^  in  my  blood :  thus  do  ye,  as 
often  as  ye  drink  [it],  in  remembrance  of  me." 
(26)  For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread,  and  drink 
this  cup,  ye  commemorate  the  death  of  our  Lord, 
until  his  advent.  (27)  He  therefore,  who  eateth 
of  the  bread  of  the  Lord,  and  drinketh  of  his  cup, 
and  is  not  worthy  of  it,  is  guilty  of  the  blood  of  the 
Lord,  and  of  his  body.  (28)  For  this  reason,  a 
man  should  examine  himself,  .and  then  eat  of  this 

29  bread,  and  drink  of  this  cup :  (29)  for,  whoever 
eateth  and  drinketh  of  it,  while  he  is  unworthy, 
eateth  and  drinketh  condemnation  on  himself,  by 
not  discerning  the  bod^^  of  the  Lord.  (30)  For  this 
cause,  many  among  you  are  diseased  and  sickl}^, 
and  many  sleep.i      (31)  For  if  we  would  judge 

32  ourselves,  we  should  not  be  judged.  (32)  But 
when  we  are  judged  by  our  Lord,  we  are  really 
chastised,'^  that  we  may  not  be  condemned  with 
the  world.  (33)  Wherefore,  my  Brethren,  when  ye 
assemble  to  eat,  wait  ye  one  for  another.    (34)  And 


25 


26 

27 


28 


30 
31 


33 
34 


Sy.  Wi- 


r-»-» 


Sy. 

Gr.  Siu6riXr]. 


or,  have  died. 


Sy.  are  chas- 
tised to  be 
chastised. 


318 


1   CORINTHIAxNS,    XII. 


|AjlJLk.oV 

^  Sy.  ]  g^  1  V  > 

^  or,  voice. 

'  Sy.  ^^ 
eSy. 

1  Allien  aLo 

f  Sy. 

s  or,  speech. 
•>  Sy.  'PLk* 


•Sy. 
Aramaeans. 


let  him  v/ho  is  hungry,  eat  at  home;  that  ye  may 
assemble,  not  for  condemnation.  And  as  to  other 
things,  1  will  give  you  directions  when  I  come. 

And    concerning   spirituals,^   my   brethren,    XII. 
I  would  have  you  know,  (2)  that  ye  have  been     2 
pagans;''  and  have  been,  without  distinction,  led 
away  after   idols,  in  Avhich    there  is  no  speech. <= 

(3)  I  therefore  inform  you,  that  there  is  no  man,     3 
that  speaketh  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  who  saith  that 
Jesus   is   accursed :  ^  neither  can  a  man  say  that 
Jesus   is   the  Lord,  except  by   the  Holy  Spirit. 

(4)  ]^ow  there  arc  diversities  of  gifts ;«  but  the 
Spirit  is  one.  (5)  And  there  are  diversities  of  min- 
istrations ;  but  the  Lord  is  one.  (6)  And  there 
are  diversities  of  energies  ;f  but  God,  who  worketh 
all  in  all  men.  is  one.  (7)  And  to  each  man,  there 
is  given  a  manifestation  of  the  Spirit,  that  it  ma}^ 
aid  him.  (8)  To  one,  by  the  Spirit,  there  is  given 
a  words  of  wisdom ;  and  to  another,  by  the  same 
Spirit,  there  is  given  a  word  of  knowledge  :  (9)  to 
another,  by  the  same  Spirit,  faith :  to  another,  by 
the  same  Spirit,  gifts  of  healing:  (10)  and  to 
another,  miracles  :h  and  to  another,  prophec}'' : 
and  to  another,  the  discerning  of  spirits  :  and  to 
another,  [divers]  kinds  of  tongues :  and  to  another, 
the  interpretation  of  tongues.  (11)  But  all  these, 
worketh  that  one  Spirit;  and  he  distributeth  to 
every  one  as  he  pleaseth.  (12)  For  as  the  body  is  12 
one,  and  in  it  are  many  members ;  and  all  those 
members  of  the  body,  though  many,  are  one  body ; 

so  also  is  the  Messiah.    (13)  For  all  of  us,  likewise,   13 
by  one  Spirit,  have  been  baptized  into  one  body, 
whether  Jews  or  Gentiles,'  whether  slaves  or  free; 
and  all  of  us  have  drinked  in  one  Spirit.     (14)  For  14 
a  body  also,  is  not  one  member,  but  many.    (15)  For  15 
if  the  foot  should  say.  Because  I  am  not  the  hand, 
I  am  not  of  the  body ;  is  it,  on  that  account,  not 
of  the  body  ?     (16)  Or  if  the  ear  should  say.  Be- 
cause I  am  not  the  eye,  I  am  not  of  the  body ;  is 
it,  on  that  account,  not  of  the  body  ?     (17)  And  if  17 
the  whole  body  were  an  eye,  where  would  be  the 
hearing  ?     Or  if  it  were  all  hearing,  where  would 
be  the  smelling  ?     (18)  But  now  hath  God  placed  18 
every  one  of  the  members  in  the  bod}^,  according 
to  his  pleasure.     (19)  And  if  they  were  all  one  19 


9 
10 


11 


IG 


1   CORINTHIANS,    XIII. 


319 


20  member,  where  would  be  the  body?  (20)  But 
now  they  are  many  members,  yet  but  one  body. 

21  (21)  The  eye  cannot  say  to  the  hand,  Thou  art  not 
needful  to  me :  nor  can  the  head  say  to  the  feet,  Ye 
are  not  needful  to  me.  (22)  But  rather,  those 
members  which  are  accounted  feeble,  are  indispen- 
sable. (23)  And  those  which  we  think  dishonora- 
ble in  the  body,  on  them  we  heap  more  honor; 
and  those  that  are  uncomely,  on  them  we  put  the 
more  decoration.  (24)  For  the  honorable  members 
in  us,  have  no  need  of  honor :  for  God  hath  tem- 
pered the  body,  and  given  more  honor  to  the  mem- 
ber which  is  inferior ;  (25)  that  there  might  be  no 
disunion^  in  the  body,  but  that  all  the  members, 
equally,  might  care  for  one  another;  (26)  so  that, 
when  one  member  is  in  pain,  they  will  all  sympa- 
thize ;  and  if  one  member  is  exalted,  all  the  mem- 
bers will  be  exalted.  (27)  Now  ye  are  the  body 
of  Messiah,  and  members  in  your  place.  (28)  For 
God  hath  placed  in  his  church,  first,  legates ;  after 
them,  prophets ;  after  them,  teachers ;  after  them, 
workers  of  miracles ;  after  them,  the  gifts  of  heal- 
ing, and  helpers,  and  leaders,  and  [various]  kinds 
of  tongues.  (29)  Are  they  all  legates?  Are  they 
all  prophets?  Are  they  all  teachers?  Are  they 
all  workers  of  miracles  ?  (30)  Have  all  of  them 
the  gifts  of  healing?  Do  they  all  speak  with 
tongues  ?  Or  do  they  all  interpret  ? — (31)  And  if 
ye  are  emulous  of  the  superior  gifts,  on  the  other 
hand,  I  show  to  you  a  better  way. 


22 


9.^ 


24 


25 
26 


27 
28 


29 
30 


31 


XIII.  If  I  could  speak  in  every  tongue  of  men,  and 
in  that  of  angels,  and  there  should  be  no  love^  in 
me,  I  should  be  like  brass  that  resoundeth,  or  the 

2  cymbal  that  maketh  a  noise.  (2)  And  if  there 
should  be  in  me  [the  gift  of]  prophecy,  and  I  should 
understand  all  the  mysteries,  and  every  science ; 
and  if  there  should  be  in  me  all  ftiith,  so  that  I 
could  move  mountains,  and  love  should  not  be  in 

3  me,  I  should  be  nothing.  (3)  And  if  I  should  feed 
out  to  the  destitute  all  I  possess ;  and  if  I  should 
give  my  body  to  be  burned ;  and  there  should  be  no 

4  love  in  me,  I  gain  nothing. — (4)  Love  is  long-suf- 
fering, and  is  kind  ;  love  is  not  envious ;  love  is  not 

5  boisterous  ;  and  is  not  inflated ;  (5)  and  doth  noth- 
ing that  causeth  shame ;  and  seeketh  not  her  own  ; 


or,  division. 


Sy.  I^Qju 


320 


1    CORINTHIANS,    XIV. 


•>  Sy.  a  Ullk  of 
much. 


Sy.  a  little  of 
much. 


is  not  passionate ;  and   tbinketh   no  evil ;  (6)  re-     6 
joiceth  not  in  iniquity,  but  rejoicctb  in  tbe  trutb ; 
(7)  bearetb  all  tbings,  believetb  all  tbings,  bopetb     7 
all,  and  eiiduretb  all.     (8)  Love  will  never  cease,     8 
But  propbesyings  will  end;  and  tongues  will  be 
silent;   and  knowledge  will  vanisb.     (9)  For  we     9 
know  but  partially ;  ^  and  we  propbesy  but  partially. 
(10)  But  wben  completeness  sball  come,  tben  tbat  10 
wbicb  is  partial  will  vanisb  away.     (11)  Wben  I  11 
was  a  cbild,  I  talked  as  a  cbild,  and  I  reasoned  as  a 
cbild,  and  I  tbougbt  as  a  cbild :  but  wben  I  became 
a   man,    I   laid    aside    tbe   tbings    of    cbildhood. 

(12)  And  now  we  see,  as  by  a  mirror,  in  simili-  12 
tude ;  but  tben  face  to  face:  now  I  know  partially  ;<= 
but    tben    sball    I   know,   just   as    I    am   known. 

(13)  For  tbese  tbree  tbings  are  abiding,  faitb,  and  13 
bope,  and  love  ;  but  tbe  greatest  of  tbese  is  love. 

Follow  after  love ;  and  be  emulous  of  tbe  gifts  XIV. 
of  tbe  Spirit,  and  especially,  tbat  ye  may  propbesy. 
(2)  For  be  tbat  speaketb  in  a  tongue,  speaketb  not     2 
unto  men,  but  unto  God ;  for  no  one  understandeth 
wbat  is  said  ;  yet  in  tbe  spirit,  be  speaketb  a  mys- 
tery.    (3)  But  be  tbat  propbesietb,  speaketb  unto     3 
men,  for  edification,  and  exbortation,  and  consola- 
tion.    (-1)  lie  tbat  speaketb  in  a  tongue,  edifictb     4 
bimself:    and   be   tbat   propbesietb,    edilictb    tbe 
cburcb.     (5)  Now  I  would  tbat  ye  all  spoke  witb     5 
tongues,  but  ratber  tbat  ye  propbesied ;  for  greater 
is  be  tbat  propbesietb,  tban  be  tbat  speaketb  in  a 
tongue,  unless  be  interpret ;  and  if  be  interpret,  be 
edilietb  tbe  cburcb.     (G)  And  now,  my  bretbren,  if     6 
I  sbould  come  among  you,  and  speak  to  you  in 
tongues,  wbat  sbould  I  profit  you ;  unless  I  sbould 
speak  to  you  eitber  by  revelation,  or  by  knowledge, 
or  by  propbecy,  or  by  doctrine  ?     (7)  For  even  in-     7 
animate  tbings  tbat  emit  sound,  wbctber  pipe  or 
barp,  if  tbcy  make  no  distinction  between  one  sound 
and  anotber,  bow  will  it  be  known,  wbat  is  sung  or 
what  is  barped  ?     (8)  And  if  tbe  trumjjet  sball  give     8 
an  uncertain  sound,  who  will  prepare  himself  for 
tbe  battle  ?     (9)  So  likewise  if  ye  utter  a  discourse     9 
in  a  tongue,  and  there  is  no  interpretation  given, 
bow  will  it  be  known  wbat  ye  liave  said  ?     Ye  will 
have  been  as  if  ye  spoke  into  the  air.     (10)  For  lo,  10 
there  are  many  kinds  of  tongues  in  tbe  world ;  and 


1   CORINTHIANS,    XIV. 


821 


12 


13 
14 

15 


19 


there  is  not  one  of  them  without  meaning.  ^ 
11  (11)  But  if  I  do  not  know  the  import^  of  the  sound, 
I  shall  be  a  barbarian^  to  him  that  speaketh,  and 
the  speaker  will  be  a  barbarian  to  me.  (12)  So 
also  ye,  since  ye  are  emulous  of  the  gifts  of  the 
Spirit  for  the  edification  of  the  church,  seek  ye  to 
excel.  (13)  And  let  him  that  speaketh  in  a  tongue, 
pray  that  he  may  interpret.  (11)  For  if  I  should 
pray  in  a  tongue,  my  spirit  prayeth,  but  my  under- 
standing is  without  fruits.  (15)  What  then  shall  I 
do  ?  I  will  pray  with  my  spirit,  and  will  pray 
with  my  understanding;  and  I  will  sing  with  my 
spirit,    and    will    sing    with    my    understanding. 

16  (16)  Otherwise,  if  thou  blessest  in  the  spirit,  how 
shall  he  that  filleth  the  place  of  one  unlearned, ^^  say 
Amen,  on  thy  giving  thanks ;  for  he  knoweth  not 

17  what  thou  sayest  ?      (17)  Thou  blessest,   indeed, 

18  very  well ;  but  thy  neighbor  is  not  edified,  (18)  I 
thank  God,  that  I  speak  with  tongues  more  than  all 
of  you.  (19)  But  in  the  church,  I  would  rather 
speak  five  words  with  my  understanding,  that  I 
might  instruct  others,  than  a  mj'riad  of  words  in  a 

20  tongue. — (20)  My  brethren,  be  ye  not  children  in 
your  thoughts  ;  but  to  evil  things  be  ye  infants ; 

21  and  in  your  thoughts  be  men,«^  (21)  In  the  law  it 
is  written,  With  a  foreign  speech,  and  in  another 
tongue,  will  I  speak  with  this  people ;  and  even  so 
also  the}^  will  not  hearken  to  me,  saith  the  Lord. 

22  (22)  Wherefore,  tongues  are  established  for  a  sign, 
not  to  the  believers,  but  to  them  that  believe  not. 
But  prophesyings  are  not  for  those  who  believe  not, 
but  for  them  that  believe.  (23)  If  therefore  the 
whole  church^  assemble,  and  they  all  speak  with 
tongues,  and  there  come  in  unlearned  persons,  or 
such  as  believe  not,  will  they  not  say  :  These  peo- 

21  pie  are  crazy  ?  (24)  But  if  ye  should  be  all  pro- 
phesying, and  one  unlearned  or  an  unbeliever 
should  come  among  you,  he  is  explored  by  you  all, 

25  and  rebuked  by  you  all ;  (25)  and  the  secrets  of  his 
heart  are  laid  open  [to  him] :  and  so  he  will  fall 
upon  his  face,  and  will  worship  God,  and  say : 
Verily,  God  is  in  you. — (26)  I  therefore  say  [to 
you]  my  brethren,  that  when  ye  assemble,  Avhoever 
of  you  hath  a  psalm,  let  him  speak  ;  and  whoever 
hath  a  doctrine,  and  whoever  hath  a  revelation,  and 
whoever   hath   a   tongue,   and  whoever   hath    an 

21 


23 


26 


*  Sy.  a  voice. 
Sy.  orX-i-Ki 
Sy.  Ur^r^ 


Sy. 

Gr.  (diojra. 


Sy.  full,  com- 


Sy.  Ua 


822 


1    CORINTHIANS,    XV. 


e  or,  immodexl. 


«  Sy. 

''  or,  are  saved. 


interpretation.      Let   them  all  be  for  edification. 
(27)  And  if  any  speak  in  a  tongue,  let  two  speak,  27 
or  at  most,  three ;  and  let  them  speak  one  by  one ; 
and  let  [some]  one  interpret.     (28)  And  if  there  is  28 
none  to  interpret,  let  him  that  speakcth  in  a  tongue, 
be  silent  in  the  church  ;  and  let  him  speak  to  hun- 
self  and  to  God.     (29)  And  as  to  prophets,  let  two  29 
or  three  speak,  and  let  the  rest  judge.      (30)  And  30 
if  to  another  sitting  b}-,  there  should  be  a  revela- 
tion, let  the  first  stop  speaking.     (31)  For  ye  can  31 
all  prophesy,  one  by  one ;  so  that  every  one  may 
learn,  and  every  one  be  comforted.     (32)  For  the  32 
spirit  of  the  prophets  is  subject  to  the  prophets. 
(33)  Because,  God  is  not  [the  author]  of  tumult,  but  33 
of  peace,  as  in  all  churches  of  the  saints. — (3i)  Let  3-i 
your  women  be  silent  in  the  church :   for  it  is  not 
permitted  them  to  speak,  but  to  be  in  subjection,  as 
also  the  law  saith.     (35)  And  if  they  wish  to  be  35 
informed  on  any  subject,  let  them  ask  their  hus- 
bands at  home:  for  it  is  unbecoming?  for  women  to 
speak  in  the  church.     (36)  What !  was  it  from  you  36 
tJiat  the  word  of  God  came  forth  ?     Or  did  it  reach 
only  to  you?     (37)  And  if  any  one  among  you  37 
thinketh  that  he  is  a  prophet,  or  that  he  is  spiritual, 
let  him  recognize  the  things  which  I  write  to  j^ou, 
as  being  the  precepts  of  our  Lord.     (38)  But  if  any  38 
one  be  ignorant,  let  him  be  ignorant. — (39)  Where-  39 
fore,  my  brethren,  be  emulous  of  prophesying :  and 
to  speak  with  tongues,  ])rohibit  not.     (40)  But  let  40 
every  thing  be  done  with  decency  and  regularity. 

And  I  make  known  to  you,  my  brethren,  the  XV 
gospel=^  which  I  preached  to  you,  and  which  ye 
received,  and  in  which  ye  stand,  (2)  and  by  which     2 
ye  have  life.''     In  what  terms  I  preached  to  you, 
ye  remember ;    unless  ye   have  believed  in  vain. 
(3)  For  I  delivered  to  you  from  the  first,  as  I  had     3 
received  it ;  that  the  Messiah  died  on  account  of 
our  sins,  as  it  is  written :    (4)   and   tliat   he  was    4 
buried  and  arose  on  the  third  day,  as  it  is  wantten : 
(5)    and  that  he  was  seen  by  Ceplias;    and  after     5 
him,  by  the  twelve:    (6)    and  after  that,  he  was     6 
seen  by  more  than  five  hundred  brethren  at  once ; 
many  of  whom  survive  at  the  present  time,  and 
some  of  them  sleep.     (7)  And  sul)soqucntly  to  this,     7 
he  was  seen  by  James ;  and  after  him,  by  all  the 


1   CORINTHIANS,    XV. 


823 


8  legates,     (8)  And  last  of  tliem  all,  lie  was  seen  by 

9  me,  as  it  were  bj  an  abortion,  (9)  I  am  the  least 
of  the  legates ;  and  am  not  worthy  to  be  called  a 
legate ;    because  I  persecuted  the  church  of  God. 

10  (10)  But  by  the  grace  of  God,  I  am  what  I  am : 
and  his  grace,  that  was  in  me,  was  not  in  vain  ;  but 
I  labored  more  than  they  all : — not  I,  but  his  grace 

11  that  was  with  me,  (11)  Whether  I,  therefore,  or 
whether  they,  so  we  preached ;  and  so  ye  believed, 

12  — (12)  And  if  the  Messiah  is  proclaimed,  as  rising 
from  the  dead  ;  how  is  it  that  there  are  some  among 
you,  who   say.    There  is    no  reviviscence  of  the 

13  dead  ?«=    (13)  And  if  there  is  no  reviviscence  of  the 

14  dead,  the  Messiah  also  hath  not  risen.  (14)  And 
if  the  Messiah  hath  not  risen,  our  preaching  is  vain, 

15  and  jour  faith  also  vain.  (15)  And  we  too  are 
found  false  witnesses  of  God ;  for  we  have  testified 
concerning  God,  that  he  raised  up  the  Messiah, 

16  when  he  did  not  raise  him  up,  (16)  For,  if  the 
dead  will  not  arise,  the  Messiah  also  hath  not  risen. 

17  (17)  And  if  the  Messiah  rose  not,  your  faith  is 

18  inane  ;^  and  ye  are  yet  in  your  sins :  (18)  and  also, 
doubtless,  they  who  have  fallen  asleep  in  the  Mes- 

19  siah,  have  perished,  (19)  And  if,  in  this  life  only, 
we  have  hope  in  the  Messiah,  we  are  the  most 

20  miserable  of  all  men. — (20)  But  now  the  IMessiah 
hath  risen  from  the  dead,  and  become  the  first-fruits 

21  of  them  that  slept.  (21)  And  as  by  a  man  came 
death,  so  also  by  a  man  came  the  reviviscence  of 

22  the  dead.  (22)  For  as  it  was  by  Adam,  that  all  men 

23  die,  so  also  by  the  Messiah  they  all  live  :  (23)  every 
one  in  his  order;  the  Messiah  was  the  first-fruits  ; 
afterwards,   they  that    are   the   Messiah's,    at  his 

24  coming,  (24)  And  then  will  be  the  end,  when  he 
shall  have  delivered  up  the  kingdom  to  God  the 
Father ;  when  every  prince,  and  every  sovereign, 

25  and  all  powers  shall  have  come  to  naught,  (25)  For 
he  is  to  reign,  until  he  shall  put  all  his  enemies 

26  under  his  feet,     (26)  And  the  last  enemy,  death, 

27  will  be  abolished.  (27)  For  he  hath  subjected  all 
under  his  feet.  But  when  he  said,  that  every  thing 
is  subjected  to  him,  it  is  manifest  that  he  is  ex- 

28  cepted,  who  subjected  all  to  him.  (28)  And  when 
all  shall  be  subjected  to  him,  then  the  Son  himself 
will  be  subject  to  him  who  subjected  all  to  him,  so 

29  that  God  will  be  all  in  all.— (29)  Otherwise,  what 


Sy. 


Sy.  -Q^ 


824 


1   CORINTHIANS,    XV. 


«  Sy.  -c^V  v> 


Sy.  the  body 
cf  its  nature. 


e  Sy.  ^m  c^  1 


Sy. 


.^U 


33 


36 
37 


shall  they  do  who  are  baptized  for^  the  dead,  if  the 
dead  rise  not?  Why  are  they  baptized  for  the 
dead?  (30)  And  why  also  do  we  stand  every  30 
hour  in  peril?  (31)  I  protest,  my  brethren,  by  31 
your  exultation,  which  is  mine  in  our  Lord  Jesus 
the  Messiah,  that  I  die  daily.  (32)  If,  as  amongst  32 
men,  I  was  cast  to  wild  beasts  at  Ephesus,  what 
did  it  profit  me,  if  the  dead  rise  not  ?  "  Let  us  eat 
and  drink ;  for  to-morrow  we  die."  (33)  Be  not 
deceived;  "Evil  stories  corrupt  well-disposed 
minds."  (34)  Let  your  hearts  be  righteously  exci- 
ted, and  sin  not:  for  there  are  some,  in  whom  is 
not  the  love  of  God :  it  is  to  your  shame,  I  say  it. 
But  some  one  of  you  may  say :  How  will  the 
dead  arise  ?  and  with  what  body  will  they  come 
forth?  (36)  Foolish  man  !  The  seed  which  thou 
so  west,  is  not  quickened,  unless  it  die.  (37)  And 
that  which  thou  sowest,  thou  sowest  not  the  body 
that  is  to  be,  but  the  naked  kernel  of  Avhcat  or  bar- 
ley, or  of  the  other  grains  :  (38)  and  God  giveth  it  38 
a  body,  as  he  pleaseth  ;  and  to  each  of  the  grains 
its  natural  body.*"  (39)  And  every  body  is  not 
alike  ;  for  the  body  of  a  man  is  one  thing,  and  that 
of  a  beast  is  another,  and  that  of  a  bird  is  another, 
and  that  of  a  fish  is  another.  (40)  And  there  are 
bodies  celestial,  and  bodies  terrestrial;  but  the 
glory  of  the  celestial  [bodies]  is  one,  and  that  of 
the  terrestrial  is  another.  (41)  And  the  glory  of  41 
the  sun  is  one  thing,  and  the  gio7y  of  the  moon  is 
another,  and  the  glory  of  the  stars  is  another ;  and 
one  star  exceedeth  another  star  in  glorj^  (42)  So 
also  in  the  reviviscence  of  the  dead.  They  are 
sown  in  corruption,  they  arise  without  corruption  : 

(43)  they  are  sown  in  dishonor,  they  arise  in  glory :  43 
they  arc  sown  in  weakness,  they  arise  in  power : 

(44)  it  is  sown  an  animal  body,  it  ariscth  a  s])irit- 
ual  body.     For  there  is  a  body  of  the  animal  life,? 
and  there  is  a  body  of  the  spirit.     (45)  So  also  is  it 
written :  "  Adam,  the  first  man,  became  a  living 
soul  ;"'>  the  second  Adam  [became]  a  quickening 
spirit.     (46)  And  the  spiritual  was  not  first ;  but  46 
the  animal,  and  then  the  spiritual.     (47)  The  first  47 
man  was  of  dust  from  the  earth  ;  the  second  man 
was  the  Lord  from  heaven.     (48)  As  he  was  of  the  48 
dust,  so  also  those  who  are  of  the  dust ;  and  as  was 

he  who  was  from  heaven,  so  also  are  the  heavenly. 


9 


40 


42 


44 
45 


1    CORINTHIANS,    XVI. 


825 


49 


50 


51 
52 


53 


56 
57 

58 


(49)  And  as  we  have  worn  the  likeness  of  him 
from  the  dust,  so  shall  we  wear  the  likeness  of  him 
from  heaven. — (50)  But  this  I  say,  my  brethren, 
that  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of 
heaven :  neither  doth  corruption  inherit  incorrup- 
tion.  (51)  Lo,  I  tell  you  a  mystery;  we  shall  not 
all  sleep,  but  we  shall  all  be  changed,  (52)  sud- 
denly, as  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  at  the  last 
trumpet,  when  it  shall  sound  ;  and  the  dead  will 
arise,  without  corruption  ;  and  we  shall  be  changed. 
(53)  For  this  which  is  corruptible,  is  to  put  on  in- 
corruption;  and  that  which  dieth,  will  put  on  ira- 

54  mortalit}^  (54)  And  when  this  that  is  corruptible, 
shall  put  on  incorruption,  and  this  that  dieth,  im- 
mortality ;  then  will  take  place  the  word  that  is 

55  written,  "Death  is  absorbed  in  victory."  (55)  Where 
is  thy  sting,  0  death  ?  And  where  is  thy  victory, 
0  grave  ?'  (56)  Now  the  sting  of  death  is  sin  ;  and 
the  strength''  of  sin  is  the  law.  (57)  But  thanks 
be  to  God,  that  giveth  us  the  victory,  through  our 
Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah.  (58)  Wherefore,  my 
brethren  and  my  beloved,  be  ye  steadfast,  and  be 
not  vacillating ;  but  be  ye  at  all  times  abundant 
in  the  work  of  the  Lord  ;  seeing  ye  know,  that  your 
labor  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord. 

XVI  And  as  to  the  collection  for  the  saints,  as  I 
directed  the  churches  of  the  Galatians,  so  do  ye. 

2  (2)  On  each  first  day  of  the  week,  let  every  one  of 
you  lay  aside  and  preserve  at  home,  what  he  is 
able; a  that  there  may  be  no  collections  when  I 

3  come.  (3)  And  when  I  come,  those  whom  ye 
shall  select,  I  will  send  with  a  letter,  to  carry  your 

4  bounty  to  Jerusalem.  (4)  And  if  it  should  be 
suitable   that  I  also  go,  they   shall  go  with  me. 

5  (5)  And  I  will  come  to  you,  when  I  pass  from 
Macedonia ;  for  I  am  about  to  pass  through  Mace- 

6  donia.  (6)  And  perhaps  I  shall  remain  with  you, 
or  winter  with  you ;  that  ye  may  accompany  me 

7  whither  I  go.  (7)  For  I  am  not  disposed  to  see 
you  now,  as  I  pass  along ;  because  I  hope  to  spend 

8  some  time  with  you,  if  my  Lord  permit  me.  (8)  For 

9  I  shall  continue  at  Ephesus  until  Pentecost :  (9)  be- 
cause a  great  door  is  opened  to  me,  which  is  full 
of  occupations  ;b  and  the  opposers  are  numerous. 

10       And  if  Timothy  come  to  you,  see  that  he  may 


Sy.  ^Q_i_» 
Sy.  IJ.^^ 


Sy.  7ohat  Com- 
eth to  his 
hand. 


Sy.  "jj^OCD 


826 


1    CORINTHIANS,    XVI. 


or,  for. 


^  Sy.  )>0,^ 

e  Sy.  Ul   ^ 


be  without  fear  among  you  ;  for  lie  doetli  the  work 
of  the  Lord,  as  I  do,     (11)  Therefore,  let  no  one  11 
despise  him  ;  but  conduct  him  on  in  peace,  that  he 
may  come  to  me ;  for  I  wait  for  him  with  the 
brethren. — (12)  As  for  Apollos,  my  brethren,  I  en-  12 
treated  him  much  to  go  with  the  brethren  to  you ; 
but  his  inch  nation  was  not  to  go  to  you  now  ;  but 
wlien  he  shall  have  opportunity,  he  will  go  to  you. 
— (13)  Watch  ye,  stand  firm  in  the  faith,  act  like  13 
men,  be  valiant.     (1-1)  Let  all  your  affairs  be  con-  14 
ducted  with  love. 

I   beseech  you,   my  brethren,    concerning    the  15 
household  of  Stephanas  ;  (for  ye  know,  that  they 
were  the  first-fruits  of  Acbaia,  and  that  they  have 
devoted  themselves  to  ministering  to  the  saints ;) 
(16)  that  ye  also  give  ear  to  them  who  are  such  ;  16 
and  to  every  one,  that  laboreth  with  us  and  aideth. 
— (17)  And  I  rejoice  at  the  arrival  of  Stephanas  17 
and  Fortunatus  and  Achaicus  :  for  they  have  sup- 
plied that  wherein  ye  were  deficient  towards  me. 
(18)  Andc   they  have   refreshed   my   spirit,    and  18 
yours:  therefore  acknowledge  ye  them  who  are 
such. — (19)  All  the   churches   that   are  in   Asia,  19 
salute  you.     Aquila  and  Priscilla,  with  the  church 
in   their    house,  salute   you   much  in   the  Lord. 
(20)  All  the  brethren  salute  you.     Salute  ye  one  20 
another  with  a  holy  kiss. 

The  salutation  in  the  handwriting  of  myself,  21 
Paul.  (22)  Whoever  loveth  not  our  Lord  Jesus  22 
the  Messiah,  let  him  be  accursed  -A  our  Lord  com- 
eth.e  (23)  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Mes-  23 
siah  be  with  you.  (24)  And  my  love  be  with  24 
you  all,  in  the  Messiah,  Jesus.     Amen. 


End  of  the  first  epistle  to  the  Corinthians;  which  teas  written 
alPhilippi  of  Macedonia,  and  was  sent  by  the  hand  of  Timothy. 


The  Second  Epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Corinthians. 


I.  Paul  a  legate  of  Jesus  the  Messiah,  by  the  good 
pleasure  of  God ;  and  Timothy  a  brother  ;  to  the 
church  of  God  that  is  at  Corinth,  and  to  all  the 

2  saints  that  are  in  all  Achaia.  (2)  Grace  be  with 
you,  and  peace,  from  God  our  Father,  and  from  our 
Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah, 

3  Blessed  be  God,  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
the  Messiah,  the  Father  of  mercies,  and  the  God  of 

4  all  consolation ;  (4)  who  comforteth  us  in  all  our 
afflictions,  that  we  also  might  be  able  to  comfort 
those  who  are  in  all  afflictions,  with  the  consolation 

5  wherewith  we  are  comforted  by  God.  (5)  For,  as 
the  sufferings  of  the  Messiah  abound  in  us,  so  also 

6  our  consolation  aboundeth  by  the  Messiah.  (6)  And 
whether  we  be  afflicted,  it  is  for  j^our  consolation 
and  for  your  life^  that  we  are  afflicted  ;  or  whether 
we  be  comforted,  it  is,  that  ye  may  be  comforted ; 
and  that  there  may  be  in  you  an  eagerness,^ 
wherewith  ye  may  end  are  those  sufferings  which 

7  we  also  suffer,  (7)  And  our  hope  concerning  you 
is  steadfast :  for  w^e  know,  that  if  ye  partake  of  the 
sufferings,  ye  will  also  partake  of  the  consolation. 

8  — (8)  But,  my  brethren,  we  wish  you  to  know, 
respecting  the  affliction  that  was  upon  us  in  Asia, 
that  we  were  afflicted  exceedingly,  beyond  our 
strength,  insomuch  that  our  life  was  ready  to  ter- 

9  minate.  (9)  And  we  passed  a  sentence  of  death 
upon  ourselves,  that  our  confidence  might  not  be 
in  ourselves,  but  in  God,  who  raiseth  up  the  dead ; 

10  (10)  who  rescued  us  from  imminent  death:  and  we 

11  hope  that  he  will  again  rescue  us,  (11)  by  the  aid 
of  your  prayers  in  our  behalf;  so  that  his  gift  to  us 
may  be  a  favor  done  for  the  sake  of  many,  and 
many  may  praise  him  on  our  account, 

12  For  our  rejoicing  is  this,  the  testimony  of  our 


or,  salvation. 
Sy. 


828 


2   CORINTHIANS,   II. 


'  Sy.  ^_l_LJ 
^  Sy.  body. 


e  Sy.  ^0105 
f  Sy.  is  faithful. 


eSy. 
Gr.  ap'pafSuv. 


19 


20 


conscience,^  that  in  simplicity  and  purity,  and  by 
the  grace  of  God,  and  not  in  the  wisdom  of  the 
flesh, 'J  we  have  conducted  ourselves  in  the  world, 
and  especially  towards   you.     (13)  We  write  no  13 
other  things  unto  you,  than  those  which  ye  know 
and  acknowledge.     And  I  trust,  ye  will  acknowl- 
edge them  to  the  end :  (14)  as  ye  have  also  par-  14 
tially  acknowledged  that  we  are  your  rejoicing,  as 
ye  also  are  ours,  in  the  day  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the 
Messiah.     (15)  And  in  this  confidence,  I  was  be-  15 
fore  disposed  to  come  to  you,  that  ye  might  receive 
the  grace  doubly;  (16)  and  to  pass  by  you  into  16 
Macedonia,  and  again  to  come  to  you  from  Mace- 
donia, and  [so]  ye  would  accompany  me  to  Judyea. 
(17)  When  therefore  I  thus  purposed,  did  I  pur-  17 
pose  as  one  inconsiderate  ?     Or,  were  the  things 
1   purposed,   things    of  the  flesh  ;e    so   that  there 
should  be  in  them  Yes,  yes,  and  No,  no  ?   (18)  God  18 
is  the  witness,^  that  our  word  to  you  was  not  Yes 
and  No.     (19)  For  the   Son   of    God,   Jesus   the 
Messiah,  who  was  preached  to  you  by  us,  [namely,] 
by  me,  by  Sylvanus,  and  by  Timotheus, — was  not 
Yes  and  No ;  but  it  was  Yes  in  him.     (20)  For  all 
the  promises  of  God  in  him,  the  Messiah,  are  Yes  ; 
for  which  cause,  we  through  him  give  [our]  Amen, 
to  the  glory  of  God.     (21)  Now  it  is  God  who  21 
establislieth  us,  with  you,  in  the  Messiah,  and  hath 
anointed  us,  (22)  and  hath  sealed   us,   and  bath  22 
given  the  earnests  of  his  Spirit  in  our  hearts. 

Moreover,  I  call  God  for  a  witness  on  my  soul,  23 
that  it  was  in  order  to  spare  you,  that  I  came  not 
to  Corinth.     (24)  Not  that  we  are  lords  over  your  24 
faith,  but  we  are  helpers  of  your  joy  ;  for  it  is  by 
faith  ye  stand.     (II.)  And  I  determined  this  with  II. 
myself,  that  I  would  not  again  come  to  you  in  sad- 
ness.    (2)  For  if  I   should   make  you  sad,  who     2 
would  make  me  joyful,  unless  he  whom   I   had 
made  sad  ?     (3)  And  I  wrote  that  very  thing  to     3 
you,  lest  when  I  came,  those  persons  whom  I  ought 
to  make  joyful,  should  make  me  sad.     For  I  have 
confidence  concerning  you,  that  my  joy  is  the  joy 
of  you  all.     (4)  And   in  much  affliction,   and  in     4 
anguish  of  heart,  I  wrote  those  things  to  you,  Avitli 
man}^  tears ;  not  that  ye  might  have  sorrow,  but 
that  ye  might  know  the  exceeding  love  I  have  for 
you. — (5)  And  if  one  hath  caused  grief,  he  hath.    5 


2   CORINTHIANS,    III. 


329 


not  grieved  me  [only],  but, — that  the  declaration 
may  not  bear  too  hard  on  you — in  a  measure,  all 

6  of  you.     (6)  And  sufficient  for  him,  is  this  rebuke 

7  proceeding  from  many :  (7)  so  that,  on  the  other 
hand,  ye  ought  to  forgive  him  and  console  him  ; 
lest  he  who  is  such  a  man,  should  be  swallowed  up 

8  with  excessive  grief     (8)  I  therefore  beseech  you, 

9  that  ye  confirm  to  him  your  love.  (9)  For  it  was 
for  this  also  that  I  wrote  [to  you],  that  I  might 
learn  by  a  trial,  whether  ye  would  be  obedient  in 

10  every  thing.  (10)  And  whom  ye  forgive,  I  also 
[forgive] :  for  that  which  I  forgave  to  any  one,  for 
your  sakes  I  forgave  it,  in  the  presence^  of  the 

11  Messiah  ;  (11)  lest  Satan  should  overreach  us  ;  for 
we  know  his  devices. 

12  Moreover,  when  I  came  to  Troas  in  announcing 
the  Messiah,  and  a  door  was  opened  to  me  by  the 

13  Lord,  (18)  there  was  no  quietude  in  my  spirit,  be- 
cause I  found  not  Titus  my  brother:  and  I  took 

14  leave  of  them,  and  went  into  Macedonia. — (14)  But 
thanks  be  to  God,  who  always  procureth  us  a  tri- 
umph in  the  Messiah,  and  manifesteth  by  us  the 
odor   of  the  knowledge   of  him  in  every  place. 

15  (15)  For,  through  the  Messiah,  we  are  unto  God  a 
sweet  odor,  in  them  that  live''  and  in  them  that 

16  perish  :  (16)  to  these,  an  odor  of  death  unto  death; 
and  to  those,  an  odor  of  life  unto  life.     And  who 

17  is  adequate  to  these  things!  (17)  For  we  are  not 
like  others,*^  who  dilute  the  words  of  God  ;  but  as 
of  the  truth,  and  as  of  God,  we  speak  in  the  Mes- 

III.  siah  before  God. — (HI.)  Do  we  begin  again  to 
show  you  Avho  we  are  ?  Or  do  we,  like  others, 
need  that  letters  recommendator}^  of  us  should  be 
written  to  you  ?     Or,  that  ye  should  write  recom- 

2  mendations  of  us  ?  (2)  Ye  are  our  epistle,  wiitten 
on  our  hearts,  and  known  and  read  by  every  man, 

3  (3)  For  ye  know  that  ye  are  an  epistle  of  the  Mes- 
siah, ministered  by  us ;  not  written  with  ink,  but 
b}'-  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God  ;  not  on  tables  of 
stone,  but  on  the  tablets  of  the  heart  of  flesh. — 

4  (4)  And  such  confidence  have  we  in  the  Messiah 

5  towards  God.  (5)  Not  that  we  are  sufficient  to 
think  any  thing,  as  of  ourselves ;  but  our  efficiency^ 

6  is  from  God  :  (6)  who  hath  fitted  us  to  be  ministers 
of  the  new  Testament,''  not  in  the  letter,  but  in  the 
Spirit ;  for  the  letter  killeth,  but  the  Spirit  giveth 


■Sy. 

Gr.  'TrpocTwo'ov. 


''  or,  are  saved. 


Sy.  the  rest. 


»  Sy.  ^\.K> 

'"  Sy.  |q_.ZU5 


330 


2    CORINTHIANS,    IV. 


"=  or,  saveih. 


^  Sy.1Zan_.5i 


"  Sy.  "toZL? 


Sy. 


^ 


^ 


life.'^     (7)  Now  if  the  ministration  of  death  was  en-     7 
graved  upon  stones  in  writing,  and  was  so  glorious 
that  the  children  of  Israel  could  not  look  on  the 
face  of  Moses,  on  account  of  the  glory  upon  his 
face  Avhich  vanished  away  ;  (8)  how  then  shall  not     8 
the  ministration  of  the  Spirit  be  still  more  glorious  ? 
(9)  For  if  there  was  glory  in  the  ministration  of     9 
condemnation,  how  much  more  shall  the  ministra- 
tion of  justification'^  excel  in  glory  ?     (10)  For  that  10 
which  was  glorious,  was  as  if  not  glorious,  in  com- 
parison with  this  which  excelleth  in  glory.  (11)  For  11 
if  that  which  is  abolished  was  glorious,  much  more 
must  that  which  abideth  be  glorious. — (12)  Seeing  12 
therefore  we  have  this  hope,  we  the  more  speak 
with  boldness;  (13)  and  are  not  like  Moses,  who  13 
threw  a  vail  over  his  face,  that  the  children  of  Israel 
might  not  behold  the  termination  of  that  which  was 
abolished.    (14)  But  they  were  blinded  in  their  un-  14 
derstanding ;  for  until  this  day,  when  the  old  Tes- 
tamente  is  read,  the  same  vail  resteth  upon  them ; 
nor  is  it  manifest  [to  them],  that  it  is  abolished  by 
the  Messiah.     (15)  And  unto  this  day,  when  Mo-  15 
ses  is  read,  a  vail  is  thrown  upon   their  hearts. 
(16)  But  when  any  of  them  is  turned  unto  the  16 
Lord,  the  vail  is  taken  from  him.     (17)  Now  the  17 
Lord  himself  is  the  Spirit.     And  where  the  Spirit 
of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  freedom.     (18)  And  we  all,  18 
with  uncovered  laces,  behold  as  in  a  mirror  the 
glory  of  the  Lord  ;  and  are  transformed  into  the 
same  likeness,  from  glory  to  glory,  as  by  the  Lord 
the  Spirit. 

Therefore,  we  are  not  weary  in  this  ministry  IV. 
which  we  have  received,  according  to  the  mercies 
that  have  been  upon  us :  (2)  Bat  we  have  renounced     2 
the  concealments  of  dishonor,  and  we  walk  not  in 
craftiness,  nor  do  we  treat  the  word  of  God  deceit- 
fully ;  but  by  the  manifestation  of  the  truth,  we  ex- 
hibit ourselves  to  all  the  consciences  of  men  before 
God. — (3)  And  if  our  gospel*  is  vailed,  it  is  vailed     3 
to  them  that  perish  ;  (-i)  to  them  whose  minds  the     4 
God  of  this  world  hath  blinded,  in  order  that  they 
might  not  believe,  lest  the  light  of  the  gospel  of  the 
glory  of  the  Messiah  (who  is  the  likeness  of  God) 
should  dawn  upon  them.    (5)  For  it  is  not  ourselves     5 
that  we  preach,  but  the  Messiah,  Jesus  our  Lord; 


2   CORINTHIANS,    V. 


331 


and,  as  to  oarselves,  that  we  are  your  servants  for 

6  Jesus'  sake.  (6)  Because  Grod,  who  commanded  the 
light  to  arise  from  darkness,  hath  himself  sliined  in 
our  hearts,  that  we  might  be  illuminated  with  the 
knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  on  the  face  of  Jesus 

7  the  Messiah, — (7)  But  we  have  this  treasure  in  an 
earthen  vessel,  that  the  excellency  of  the  power^ 

8  might  be  from  God,  and  not  from  us.  (8)  And  in 
every  thing  we  are  oppressed,  but  not  suffocated ; 

9  we  are  corrected,  but  not  condemned ;  (9)  we  are 
persecuted,  but  not  forsaken ;  Ave  are  prostrated,  but 

10  perish  not.  (10)  For  we  bear  in  our  body,  at  all 
times,  the  dying  of  Jesus  ;  that  the  life  also  of  Jesus 

11  might  be  manifested  in  our  bod}^  (11)  For  if  Ave 
are  delivered  over  alive  unto  death,  for  Jesus'  sake, 
even  so  also  Avill  the  life  of  Jesus  be  manifested  in 

12  this  our  mortal  body. — (12)  Noav  therefore,  in  us 

13  death  is  active,  but  in  you,  life.  (13)  Having  there- 
fore the  same  spirit  of  faith, — (as  it  is  Avritlen,  I 
believed,  therefore  also  have  I  spoken,)  Ave   also 

14  believe,  and  therefore  speak ;  (14)  knoAving  that  he, 
Avho  resuscitated  our  Lord  Jesus,  Avill  also  resusci- 
tate us  by  Jesus,  and  will  receive  us,  with  you,  to 

15  himself  (15)  For  all  things  are  for  your  sakes,  that 
Avhile  grace  aboundeth  by  means  of  many,  thanks- 
giving may  abound  to  the  glory  of  God. 

16  For  this  cause  Ave  faint  not ;  for  though  our  out- 
Avard  man  perish,  yet  the  inner  [man]  is  renoA^ated 

17  day  by  day.  (17)  For  the  affliction  of  the  present 
time,  though  very  small  and  light,  prepareth  for  us 
great    glory,    Avithout   end,    for   ever    and    ever ; 

18  (18)  Avhile  we  look  not  at  these  seen  things,  but  at 
those  not  seen ;  for  these  seen  things  are  tempo- 

Y.  rary,  but  those  not  seen  are  eternal.  (V.)  For  Ave 
know  that,  if  our  house  on  earth — this  of  the  body, 
were  dissolved,  yet  Ave  haA^e  a  building  of  God,  a 
house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  heaA^en. 

2  (2)  And  on  this  account  also,  we  groan,  and  Avish 

3  to  be  clothed  Avith  our  house  from  heaven  :  (3)  if 
indeed,  when  clothed,  Ave  shall  not  be  found  naked. 

4  (4)  For  while  we  are  here  in  this  house,  we  groan 
under  its  burden ;  yet  ye  desire,  not  to  throw  it 
off,  but  to  be  clothed  over  it,  so  that  its  mortalitj^ 

5  may  be  absorbed  in  life.  (5)  And  he  that  pre- 
pareth us  for  this  thing,  is  God;  who  hath  given 

6  us  the  earnest^  of  his  Spirit.     (6)  Therefore,  because 


Sy.]J. 


or,  pledge. 


332 


2   CORINTHIANS,   VI. 


Sy.  i>CLi^  = 
Gr.  /5/;jxa. 


Sy.  ]i\^'rC^ 
jZ.,-K»    OCT! 


"  Sy.  lio:.,! 

oSy.lA^-^ 
^Sy.  ]Z.on  i?l 

»  or,  salvation. 


10 


13 
14 


we  know  and  are  persuaded,  that  while  we  lodge  in 
the  body  we  sojourn  awaj  ironi  our  Lord  ;  (7)  (for 
we  walk  by  faith,  and  not  by  sight ;)  (8)  therefore 
we  are  coutideut,  and  desirous  to  be  away  from  the 
body,  and  to  be  with  our  Lord.  (9)  We  are  assid- 
uous, that  whether  we  are  absent,  or  whether  at 
home,  we  may  please  him.  (10)  For  we  are  all  to 
stand  before  the  judgment-seat''  of  the  Messiah,  that 
each  may  receive  retribution  in  the  body,  [for]  what 
he  hath  done  in  it,  whether  of  good,  or  whether  of 
evil. 

Therefore  because  we  know  the  fear  of  our  Lord,  11 
we  persuade  men  ;  and  we  are  made  manifest  unto 
God  ;  and  I  hope  also,  we  are  made  manifest  to  your 
minds.     (12)  We  do  not  again  laud  ourselves  to  12 
you ;  but  we  give  you  occasion  to  glory  in  us,  to 
them  who  glory  in  appearance  and  not  in  heart. 
(13)  For  if  we  are  extravagant,  it  is  for  God :  and 
if  we  are  discreet,  it  is  for  j^ou,     (14)  For  the  love 
of    the  Messiah   constraineth    us  to  reason   thus : 
One  died  for  all ;  therefore  are  all  dead.     (15)  And  15 
he  died  for  all,  that  they  who  live  should  not  live 
to  themselves,  but  to  him  who  died  for  them  and 
rose  again.     (16)  And  therefore,  we  know  no  person  IG 
afcer  the  flesh :  and  if  we  have  known  the  Messiah 
after  the  flesh,  yet  henceforth  we  know  [him]  no 
more.     (17)  Whoever  therefore  is  in  the  Messiah, 
is  a  new  creature  :'=  old  things  have  passed  away  ; 

(18)  and  all  things  are  made  new,  by  God;  who  18 
hath  reconciled  us  to  himself  by  the  Messiah,  and 
hath  given   to  us  the  ministry  of  reconciliation. 

(19)  For  God  was  in  the  Messiah,  who  hath  recon- 
ciled the  world  with  his  majesty,  and  did  not  reckon 
to  them  their  sins ;  and  who  hath  placed  in  us  the 
word   of  reconciliation.^! — (20)  We   are  therefore 
ambassadors  for  the  Messiah,  and  it  is  as  if  God  was 
beseeching  you  by  us.     In  behalf  of  the  Messiali, 
therefore,  we  beseech  [}'ou],  be  ye  reconciled  to 
God.     (21)  For,  on  your  account,  he  hath  made  him  21 
who  knew  no  sin  to  be  sin,"^  that  we  might  b^^  him 
become  the  righteousness''  of  God. — (VI.)     And  VI. 
as  aiders  we  entreat  of  you,  that  the  grace  of  God 
which  ye  have  received,  may  not  be  ineffectual  in 
you.     (2)  For  he  hath  said,  In  an  acceptable  time     2 
have  I  heard  thee,  and  in  the  day  of  life=^  I  have 
aided  thee.     Behold,  now  is  the  acceptable  time  1 


17 


19 


20 


2   CORINTHIANS,    VII. 


333 


3  and  behold,  now  is  tlie  day  of  life  !  (3)  Give  ye  no 
occasion  of  offence  to  any  one  in  any  thing,  that 

4  there  may  be  no  reproach  on  our  ministry.  (4)  But 
we,  in  ail  things,  would  show  ourselves  to  be  the 
ministers  of  God,  in  much  endurance,  in  afflictions, 

5  in  necessity,  in  distresses,  (5)  in  scourgings,  in  impris- 
onments, in  tumults,  in  toil,  in  watching,  in  fasting; 

6  (6)  by  purity,  by  knowledge,  by  long  suffering,  by 
benignity,  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  love  unfeigned, 

7  (7)  by  the  speaking  of  truth,  by  the  energy  of  God, 
by  the  armor  of  righteousness  on  the  right  hand  and 

8  on  the  left;  (8)  amid  honor  and  dishonor,  amid 
praise  and  contumely  ;  as  deceivers,  and  yet  true  ; 

9  (9)  as  not  known,  and  yet  we  are  well  known ;  as 
dying,  and  behold,  we  live  ;  as  chastised,  yet  not 

10  killed;  (10)  as  sorrowful,  yet  alwa3'S  rejoicing;  as 
indigent,  yet  enriching  many ;  as  possessing  noth- 

11  ing,  yet  having  all  things. — ^(11)  0  ye  Corinthians, 
our  mouth  is  opened  towards  you,  and  our  heart 

12  expanded.     (12)  Ye  are  not  straitened  in  us,  but 

13  ye  are  straitened  in  your  own  bowels.^  (13)  I 
speak  as  to  [my]  children.  Pay  me  the  debt  which 
ye  owe,'^  and  expand  your  love  towards  me, — 

14  (14)  And  be  ye  not  yoke-fellows  with  them  that 
believe  not :  for  what  fellowship  hath  righteousness 
with  iniquity  ?  or  what  communion  hath  light  with 

15  darkness  ?  (15)  or  what  concord  hath  the  Messiah 
with  Satan  ?  or  what  part  hath  a  believer  with  an 

16  unbeliever?  (16)  or  what  agreement  hath  the  tem- 
ple of  God  with  that  of  demons?  For  ye  are  the 
temple  of  the  living  God ;  as  it  is  said,  I  will  dwell 
among  them,  and  walk  among  them,  and  will  be 

17  their  God,  and  they  shall  be  my  people.  (17)  Where- 
fore, come  ye  out  from  among  them,  and  be  ye 
separate  from  them,  saith  the  Lord ;  and  come  not 
near  the  unclean   thing,  and  I  will  receive  you; 

18  (18)  and  will  be  to  you  a  Father,  and  ye  sliall  be 
sons  and  daughters  to  me,  saith  the  Lord  Almighty, 

VII, — (VII.)  Seeing,  therefore,  wc  have  these  promises, 
my  beloved,  let  us  cleanse  ourselves  from  all  defile- 
ment of  the  flesh  and  of  the  spirit ;  and  let  us  work 
righteousness,  in  the  fear  of  God. 

2  Bear  with  us,  my  brethren ;  we  have  done  evil 
to  no  one ;  we  have  corrupted  no  one ;  we  have 

3  wronged  no  one.  (3)  I  speak  [thus],  not  to  con- 
demn you ;  for  I  have  said  before,  that  ye  are  treas- 


or,  affections. 
or,  the  interest- 
money  which 
is  with  you. 


834: 


2   CORINTHIANS,   VII. 


l-lJ31(nj.£)=r 


'  Sv.  LoL 


or,  salvation. 


or,  affections. 


ured  in   our  hearts,  to  die  and  to  live  together. 
(4)  I  have  great  assurance^  before  you,  and  have 
much  glorying  in  you ;  and  I  am  full  of  comfort. 
And  joy  greatly  aboundeth  to  me,  in  all  my  afUic- 
tions.     (5)  For,  after  we  came  to  Macedonia,  there 
was  no  rest  for  our  body,  but  we  were  distressed  in 
every  thing;  without  was  conflict,  and  within  was 
fear.     (6)  But  God  who  comforteth  the  depressed, 
comforted  us  by  the  arrival  of  Titus.     (7)  And  not 
merely  by  his  arrival,  but  also  by  the  refreshing 
with  which  he  was  refreshed  by  you.     For  he  told 
us  of  your  love  towards  us,  and  of  your  gTief,  and 
of  your  zeal  in  our  behalf:  and  when  I  heard  it,  my 
joy  was  great.      (8)  And  although  I  made  you  sad 
by  the  epistle,  I  do  not  regret  it,  though  I  did  re- 
gret it ;  for  I  see  that  that  epistle,  though  for  a  time 
it  made  you  sad,  (9)  yet  it  procured  me  joy, — not 
because  ye  had  sorrow,  but  because  j'our  sorrow 
brought  you  to  repentance ;  for  ye  sorrowed  in 
godly  sorrow;  so  that  ye  received  no  detriment 
from  us.     (10)  For,  sorrowing  on  account  of  God, 
worketh  a  conversion^  of  the  soul  which  is  not  re- 
versed, and  a  turning  unto  life  :<=  but  the  sorrowing 
of  the  world  worketh  death.     (11)  For  behold  this 
same  thing,  that  ye  were  distressed  on  account  of 
God,  what  solicitude  it  wrought  in  you,  and  apolo- 
gizing, and  indignation,  and  fear,  and  love,  and  zeal, 
and  revenge  ?     And  in  all  things  ye  have  shown, 
that  ye  are  [now]  pure  in  that  matter.     (12)  And  it 
will  be  [seen]  that  I  wrote  to  you,  not  for  the  sake 
of  him  who  did  the  wrong,  nor  for  the  sake  of  liim 
who  received  the  wrong,  [only,]  but  that  your  solici- 
tude in  respect  to  us  might  be  known  before  God. 

(13)  AVhcrefore  we  were  comforted ;  and  with  our 
consolation,  we  were  the  more  joyful  for  the  joy  of 
Titus,  because  his  spirit  was  refreshed  by  you  all : 

(14)  so  that  I  was  not  ashamed  of  that  in  which  I 
had  gloried  to  him,  respecting  you  ;  but  as  in  every 
thing  we  spoke  the  truth  to  you,  so  also  our  glory- 
ing before  Titus,  is  found  to  be  in  truth :  (15)  and 
also  las  bowels*!  are  the  more  enlarged  towards  j-ou, 
while  he  remembereth  the  submission  of  3-ou  all, 
and  how  ye  received  him  Avith  fear  and  trembling. 
(16)  I  rejoice,  that  in  every  thing  I  have  full  conii-  16 
dence  in  you. 


9 


10 


11 


12 


11 


15 


2  CORINTHIANS,    VIII. 


335 


VIII.  And,  my  brethren,  we  make  known  to  you  the 
grace  of  God  which  was  conferred  on  the  churches 

2  of  the  Macedonians ;  (2)  that  in  the  great  trial  of 
their  affliction,  there  was  an  abounding  to  their  joy, 
and  the  depth  of  their  poverty  was  exuberant  in 

3  the  riches  of  their  liberahty.^^  (3)  For  I  testify 
that,  according  to  their  ability,''  ana  beyond  tlieir 

4  ability,  in  the  spontaneity  of  their  mind,  (4)  they 
besought  us,  with  much  entreaty,  that  they  might 
participate  in  the  benelicence  of  the  ministration  to 

5  the  saints.  (5)  And  not  [only]  as  we  had  expected, 
but  they  first  gave  themselves  unto  the  Lord,  and 

6  to  us  by  the  will  of  God.  (6)  So  that  we  requested 
Titus,  that  as  he  had  begun,  so  he  would  perfect  in 

7  you  also  the  same  beneficence. — (7)  And  as  ye  are 
enriched  in  every  thing,  in  faith,  and  speech,  and 
knowledge,  and  in  all  diligence,  and  in  our  love 
towards  you,  so  abound  ye  in  this  beneficence  also. 

8  (8)  I  do  not  actually  command^  you,  but  by  the 
promptitude  of  your  fellow  [disciples],  I  would  test 

9  the  sincerity  of  your  love.  (9)  For  ye  know  the 
goodness^  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  who 
when  he  was  rich,  for  your  sakes  became  poor,  that 

10  by  his  poverty  ye  might  be  made  rich.  (10)  And 
I  urgently  recommend^  to  you,  that  which  is  for 
your  advantage  ;  inasmuch  as  ye  began,  a  year  ago, 

11  not  only  to  purpose,  but  also  to  perform.  (11)  And 
now  complete  ye  by  action,  what  ye  purposed  ;  that 
as  ye  had  a  promptitude  in  your  purposing,  so  ye 
may  fulfill  [it]  in  action,  according  to  your  ability. ^ 

12  (12)  For  if  there  is  a  willingness,  a  person  is  ac- 
cepted according  to  what  he  hath,  and  not  accord- 

13  ing  to  what  he  hath  not.  (13)  For  it  is  not,  that 
others   may  have    easement,  and   you  pressure ; 

ll  (11)  but  that  ye  may  be  on  equality  at  the  present 
time  ;  and  that  your  abundance  may  be  [a  supply] 
to  their  want ;  that  their  abundance  likewise  may 
be  [a  supply]  to  your  want ;  that  there  may  be 

15  equality.  (15)  As  it  is  written,  lie  Avho  gathered 
much,  had  nothing  over  ;  and  he  that  gathered  little, 

16  was  not  deficient. — (16)  But  thanks  be  to  God, 
who  put  into  the  heart  of  Titus  this  solicitude  for 

17  you.  (17)  For  he  received  our  exhortation  ;  and, 
because  he  was  very  anxious,  he  cheerfully  set  out 

18  to  visit  you.  (18)  And  we  also  sent  with  him  that 
our  brother,  whose  praise  in  the  gospel  is  in  all 


»  or,  simplicity. 

^  Sy.  ]Jj_K»,  or 
power. 


*=  Sy.  command- 
ing command. 

Sy. 

recommending 
recommend. 


f  Sy.  from  lohat 
ye  have. 


336 


2   CORINTHIANS,    IX. 


eSy. 


Gr.  d'tfoo'ToXoi. 


Sy.*jAD5a:D 


19 


20 


21 


24 


2 


the  churches ;  (19)  inasmuch  as  he  likewise  had 
been  expressly  chosen  by  the  churches,  to  accom- 
pany me  with  this  beneficence  which  is  ministered 
by  us  to  the  glory  of  God  and  to  our  cordiality.? 
(20)  And  we  hereby  guarded,  that  no  one  should  cast 
censure  on  us,  in  [respect  to]  this  abundance  which 
is  ministered  by  us.      (21)  For  we  are  attentive  to 
things  commendable,  not  only  before  God,  but  also 
before  men.     (22)  And  we  also  sent  with  them  that  22 
brother  of  ours,  who  hath  often,  and  in  many  things, 
been  proved  diligent  by  us ;  and  is  now  particu- 
larly diligent,  from  the  great  confidence  [he  hath] 
in  you.     (23)  And  therefore,  if  Titus  [be  inquired  23 
about],   he  is  my  associate    and    assistant  aniong 
you  :  or  if  our  other  brethren,  they  are  the  legates'^ 
of  the  churches  of  the  Messiah's  glory.    (24)  There- 
fore, exhibit  ye  to  them,  in  the  presence  of  all  the 
churches,  a  demonstration  of  your  love  and  of  our 
glorying  respecting  you. — (IX.)  And  concerning  IX 
the  ministration  by  the  saints,  it  would  be  super- 
fluous for  me  to  write  to  you  :  (2)  for  I  know  the 
goodness  of  your  mind  ;  and  therefore  I  gloried  of 
you  before  the  Macedonians,  that  Achaia  was  ready 
a  year  ago;    and  your  zeal  hath  excited   many. 
(3)  Yet  I  sent  the  brethren,  lest  the  glorying  with 
which  we  have  gloried  in  you  in  regard  to  this 
matter,  should  prove  vain ;  and  that  ye,  as  I  said, 
may  be  ready ;   (4)  so  that,  if   the  Macedonians 
should  come  with  me,  and  should  find  you  unpre- 
pared, we — not  to  say,  ye — should  be  put  to  shame 
for  that  glorying  in  which  we  gloried.     (5)  There- 
fore I  was  careful  to  request  these  my  brethren,  to 
go  before  me  unto  you,  that  they  might  make  up 
this  benefaction,  a  of  which  ye  were  advised  long 
before  to  have  it  ready,  as  being  a  benefaction,  and 
not  a  matter  of  cupidity.     (6)  And  this  [I  say] : 
lie  that  soweth  sparingl}',  shall  also  reap  sparing!}" ; 
and  he  that  soweth   bountifully,  shall   also   reap 
bountifully.     (7)  Every  man,  according  to  his  own 
views,  not  with  sadness,  not  by  constraint :  for  the 
Lord  loveth  a  joyous  giver.     (8)  F'or  it  is  in  the 
power  of  God,  to  make  all  good  abound  to  you,  so 
that  3'e  may  have,  at  all  times,  and  in  every  thing, 
what  is  sufficient  for  you  ;  and  may  abound   in 
every  good  work.     (9)  As  it  is  written.  He  hath 
dispersed  and  given  to  the  poor ;  and  his  righteous- 


6 


9 


2   CORINTHIANS,    X. 


337 


10  ness''  is  established  for  ever.  (10)  Now  he  that 
giveth  seed  to  the  sower,  and  bread  for  food,  may- 
he  give  and  multiply  your  seed,  and  increase  the 

11  fruits  of  your  righteousness  :  (11)  so  that  in  every 
thing,  ye  may  be  enriched  unto  all  liberality, <=  to 

12  the  completion  of  our  thanksgiving  to  God.  (12) 
For  the  performance  of  this  ministration,  not  only 
supplieth  the  want  of  the  saints,  but  is  also  rich  in 

13  many  thanksgivings  to  God.  (13)  For  on  account 
of  the  test  of  this  ministration,  we  glorify  God,  that 
ye  do  subject  yourselves  to  the  profession  of  the 
gospel'^  of  the  Messiah,  and  that  in  your  liberality, ^ 
ye  communicate  with   them   and  with    all  men : 

11  (11)  and  they  put  up  prayer  for  j^ou,  Avith  much 
love,  because  of  the  abundance  of  the  grace  of  God 

15  that  is  upon  you.  (15)  Thanks  be  to  God  for  his 
unspeakable  gift. 

X.  Now  I,  Paul,  beseech  you,  by  the  mildness  and 
gentleness  of  the  Messiah, — although  I  am  mild  to- 
wards you  when  present,    but  bold  towards  you 

2  when  absent !— (2)  yet  I  beseech  of  you  that,  when 
I  come,  I  may  not  be  compelled  by  the  boldness 
that  is  in  me  to  be  daring,  as  I  estimate  it,  towards 
the  persons  who  think  we  walk  according  to  the 

3  flesh.     (3)  For,  although  we  walk  in  the  flesh,  our 
•1  warfare  is  not  after  the  flesh.     (4)  For  the  arms  of 

our  warfare  are  not  those  of  the  flesh,  but  those  of 
the  power  of  God  ]^  by  which  we  subdue  rebellious 

5  castles.  (5)  And  we  demolish  imaginations,  and 
every  lofty  thing  that  exalteth  itself  against  the 
knowledge  of  God,  and  subjugate  all  reasonings  to 

6  obedience  to  the  Messiah.  (6)  And  we  are  pre- 
pared, when  your  obedience  shall  be  complete,  to 

7  execute  judgment  on  all  the  disobeying. — (7)  Do 
ye  look  on  outward  appearances  ?  If  any  one  is 
confident  in  himself  that  he  is  of  the  Messiah,  let 
him  know,  from  himself,  that  as  he  is  of  the  Mes- 

8  siah,  so  also  are  we.  (8)  For  if  I  should  glory 
somewhat  more,  in  the  authority^'  which  our  Lord 
hath  given  me,  I  should  not  be  ashamed  ;  for  he 
gave  it  to  us  for  your  edification,  and  not  for  your 

9  destruction.  (9)  But  I  forbear,  lest  I  should  be 
thought   to   terrify  you  terribly,  by  my  epistles. 

10  (10)  For  there  are  some  who  say,  [His]  epistles  are' 
weighty  and  forcible,  but  his  bodily  presence*^  is! 


Sy.  "j2.cm_.5l 


or,  simplicity. 


Sy.  ]^:om 
or,  simplicily. 


or,  divine 
power. 


Sy. 


Sy.  presence 
of  his  body. 


838 


2  CORINTHIANS,    XL 


^  or,  out  of  our 
province. 


Sy.  a  jealousy 
of  God. 


Sy.  "jlinrfi 


Sy.  commil- 
tinff  commil. 


weak,  and  his  speecli  contemptible.     (11)  But  let  11 
him  who  saith  so,  consider  this,  that  such  as  we  are 
in  our  epistolary  discourse,  when  absent,  such  also 
are  we  in  action,  when  present.     (12)  For  we  dare  12 
not  value,  or  compare  ourselves,  with  those  who 
vaunt :  but  the}',  because  they  compare  themselves 
with  themselves,  are  not  wise.     (13)  But  we  will  13 
not  glory  beyond  our  measure, '^  but  within   the 
measure  of  the  limits  which  God  hath  unparted  to 
us,  that  we  should  reach  as  far  as  you.     (14)  For  14 
we  do  not  stretch  ourselves,  as  if  not  reaching  to 
you ;  for  we  do  reach  as  far  as  you  in  the  annunci- 
ation of  the  Messiah.     (15)  And  we  do  not  glory  15 
beyond  our  measure,  in  the  toil  of  others:  but  we 
have  the  hope,  that  when  your  faith  shall  mature, 
we  shall  be  magnified  by  3-ou,  as  [being  within]  our 
measure  ;  (16)  and  that  we  shall  so  abound  also,  as  16 
to  make  announcements  beyond  you.     It  is  not  in 
the  measure  of  others,  [and]  in  things  ready  pre- 
pared, that  we  will  glory.     (17)  But  let  him  that  17 
will  glory,  glory  in  the  Lord.      (18)  For  not  he  18 
who  praiseth  himself,  is  approved ;  but  he  whom 
the  Lord  praiseth. 

I  would  that  3"e  could  bear  with  me  a  little,  that  XI. 
I  might  talk  foolishly :  and  indeed,  bear  ye  with 
me.     (2)  For  I  am  jealous  over  you,  with  a  godly     2 
jealousy  r'^  for  I  have  espoused  you  to  a  husband 
as  a  chaste  virgin,  whom  I  would  present  to  the 
Messiah.     (3)  But  I  fear,  lest,  as  the  serpent  be-     3 
guiled  Eve  by  his  craftiness,  so  your  minds  should 
be  corrupted  from  simplicity  towards  the  Messiah. 
(4)  For  if  he  that  cometh  to  you,  had  proclaimed     4 
to  you  another  Jesus,  whom  we  have  not  proclaim- 
ed ;  or  if  ye  had  received  another  Spirit,  which  ye 
have  not  received;  or  another  gospel,''  which  ye 
have  not  accepted ;  ye  might  well  have  given  as- 
sent.— (5)  For,  I  suppose,  I  came  not  short  of  those     5 
legates  who  most  excel.    (6)  For,  though  I  be  rude     6 
in  speech,  yet  not  in  knowledge ;  but  in  all  things 
we  have  been  manifest  among  you.     (7)  Did  I     7 
indeed  commit^  an  offence,  by  humbling  myself 
that  yc  might  be  exalted  ?  and  by  proclaiming  the 
gospel  of  God  to  you  gratis?     (8)  And  I  robbed     8 
other  churches,  and  I  took  jiay  [of  them]  for  min- 
istering to  you.     (9)  And  when  I  came  among  you     9 


2   CORINTHIANS,    XL 


539 


and  was  needy,  I  was  burdensome  to  none  of  you ; 
for  the  brethren  who  came  from  Macedonia,  sup- 
plied my  wants  :  and  in  all  things  I  kept  myself, — 
and  I  will  keep  myself,  from  being  burdensome  to 
you.  (10)  As  the  truth  of  the  Messiah  is  in  me, 
this  glorying  shall  not  be  made  vain  as  to  me  in 
the  regions  of  Achaia.     (11)  AVhy  ?      Because  I 

12  do  not  love  you  ?  God  knoweth.  (12)  But  what 
I  do,  that  also  I  will  do  ;  that  I  may  cut  off  occa- 
sion, from  them  who  seek  occasion:  so  that  in  the 
thing  wherein  they  glory,  they  may  be  found  even 
as  we.  (13)  For  they  are  false  legates,  craft}' 
workers,  and  feign  themselves  to  be  legates  of 
the  Messiah.  (14)  And  in  this  there  is  nothing 
strange.  For  if  Satan  feigneth  himself  an  angel  of 
light,  (15)  it  is  no  great  tliiug  if  his  ministers  feign 
themselves  ministers  of  righteousness;  whose  end 
shall  be  according  to  their  works. — (16)  Again  I 
say,  let  no  one  think  of  me,  as  being  a  fool :  or  if 
otherwise,  receive  me  as  a  fool,  that  I  may  glory  a 
little.  (17)  What  I  am  [now]  saying,  I  say  not  in 
our  Lord,  but  as  in  folly,  in  this  matter*^  of  glory- 
ing. (18)  Because  many  glory  after^  the  flesh,  I 
also  will  glory.  (19)  For  ye  hear  with  indulgence 
them  who  lack  reason,  seeing  ye  are  wise.  (20) 
And  ye  give  ear  to  him,  who  putteth  you  in  bon- 
dage ;  and  to  him,  who  devoureth  you ;  and  to 
him,  who  taketh  from  you ;  and  to  him,  who  ex- 
alteth  himself  over  you ;  and  to  him,  who  smiteth 

21  you  in  the  face.  (21)  I  speak  as  if  under  contempt : 
I  speak  as  if  we  were  impotent,  through  deficiency 
of  understanding  ;  that  in  whatever  thing  any  one 
is  presuming,^  I  also  am  presuming.  (22)  If  they 
are  Hebrews,  so  I  also :  or  if  they  are  Israelites,  I 
also.  If  they  arc  the  seed  of  Abraham,  I  also 
(23)  If  they  are  ministers  of  the  Messiah,  (in  de- 
fect of  understanding,  I  say  it,)  I  am  superior  to 
them  :  in  toils  more  than  they,  in  stripes  more  than 
they,  in  bonds  more  than  they,  in  deaths  mauy 
times.    (24)  By  the  Jews,  five  times  was  I  scourged, 

25  each  time  with  forty  stripes  save  one.  (25)  Three 
times  was  I  beaten  with  rods :  at  one  time  I  was 
stoned  :  three  times  I  was  in  shipwreck,  by  day  and 
by  night ;  I  have  been  in  the  sea,  Avithout  a  ship. 

26  (26)  In  journeyings  many,  in  peril  by  rivers,  in 
peril  by  robbers,  in  peril  from  my  kindJred,  in  peril 


10 
11 


13 
14 
15 
16 


17 

18 
19 
20 


22 


23 


24 


^  or,  j)lace. 
*  or,  in. 


or,  bold, 
daring. 


340 


2    CORINTHIANS,    XII. 


Sy.        ' 

Sy.  ]Ji 
Sy.  4>\i> 


or,  of  this 
{thing.) 


or,  abundance. 


Sy.  »j^j 


21 


28 


29 
30 


from  Gentiles :  I  have  been  in  peril  in  cities ;  I 
have  been  in  peril  in  the  de.sert,  in  peril  in  the  sea, 
in  peril  from  false  brethren.      (27)    In   toil   and 
weariness,  in  much  watching,  in  hanger  and  thirst, 
in  much  fasting,  in  cold  and  nakedness :  (28)  be- 
sides many  other  things,  and  the  thronging  around 
me  every  day,  and  my  anxiety  for  all  the  churches. 
(29)  Who  becometh  weak,  and  I  become  not  weak  ? 
Who  is  stumbled,  and  I  burn  not  ?     (30)  If  I  must 
glorj^,  I  will  glory  in  my  infirmities.     (31)  God,  31 
the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  blessed 
for  ever  and    ever, — he   knoweth  that  I  lie  not. 
(32)  At  Damascus,  the  commander  of  the  army  of  32 
Aretas  the  king,  guarded  the  city  of  the  Dama- 
scenes, to  seize  me.     (33)  And  from  a  window,  in  a  33 
basket,  they  let  me  down  from  the  wall,  and  I  es- 
caped from  his  hands. — (XII.)  Glorying  must  be,  XII. 
but  it  is  not  profitable  :  so  I  proceed  to  visions  and 
revelations  of  our  Lord.     (2)  I  knew  a  man  in  the     2 
Messiah   fourteen   years  ago,   (but  whether   in   a 
body,  or  whether  out  of  a  body,  I  know  not ;  God 
knoweth  ;)  Avho  was  caught  up  to  the  third  [region] 
of  heaven.     (3)  And  I  knew  this  same  man  ;  (but     3 
whether  in  a  body,  or  out  of  a  body,  I  know  not ; 
God  knoweth  ;)  (4)  and  he  was  caught  up  to  Para-     4 
dise,^  and  heard  ineffable  words,''  which  it  is  not 
permitted^  a  man  to  utter.      (5)  Of  him'^  I  will     0 
gloiy  :  but  of  myself  I  will  not  glory,  except  in  my 
infirmities.     (6)  Yet  if  I  were  disposed  to  glory,  I 
should  not  be  without  reason ;  for  I  declare  the 
truth.     But  I  refrain,  lest  any  one  should  think  of 
me,  beyond  what  he  seeth  in  me  and  heareth  from 
me. — (7)  And,  that  I  might  not  be  uplifted  by  the 
excellency^  of  the  revelations,  there  was  imparted 
to  me  a  thorn  in  my  flesh,  the  angel  of  Satan,  to 
buffet  me,  that  I  might  not  be  ui^lifted.     (8)  Re- 
specting this,  I  thrice  besought  ray  Lord,  that  it 
might  depart  from  me.     (9)  And  he  said  to  me. 
My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee ;  for  my  power^"  is 
perfected  in  weakness.     Gladly,  therefore,  will  I 
glory  in  my  infirmities,  that  tlie  power  of  the  Mes- 
siah may  rest  upon  me.      (10)  Therefore  I  have 
pleasure  in  infirmities,  in  reproach,  in  afflictions,  in 
persecutions,  in  distresses,  which  are  for  the  Mes- 
siah's sake  :  for  when  I  am  weak,  then  am  I  strong. 
— (11)  Behold,  I  have  become  foolish  in  my  glory- 


6 


9 


10 


11 


2  CORINTHIANS,    XIII. 


341 


ing,  for  ye  compelled  me.  For  ye  ought  to  bear 
witness  for  me  ;  because  I  was  inferior  in  nothing 
to  those  legates  who  most  excel,  although  I  was 

12  nothing.  (12)  I  wrought  among  you  the  signs^  of 
the  legates,  with  all  patience  ;  and  in  prodigies,  and 

13  in  wonders,  and  in  mighty  deeds.^  (13)  For  in 
what  fell  ye  short  of  the  other  churches,  except  in 
this,  that  I  was  not  burdensome  to  you  ?     Forgive 

1-1  me  this  fault,  (14)  Behold,  this  third  time  I  am 
ready  to  come  to  you,  and  I  Avill  not  burden  you ; 
for  I  seek  not  yours,  but  you :  for  children  ought 
not  to  lay  up  treasures  for  the  parents,  but  the  pa- 

15  rents  for  their  children.  (15)  And  cheerfully  will 
I  both  pay  [my]  expenses,  and  also  give  myself  for 
your  souls ;  although  the  more  I  love  you,  the  less 

16  ye  love  me. — (16)  But  perhaps,  though  I  was  not 
burdensome  to  you,  yet,   like  a  cunning  man,  I 

17  filched  from  you  by  craftiness !  (17)  Was  it  by  the 
hand  of  some  other  person  whom  I  sent  to  you, 

18  that  I  pilfered  from  you  ?  (18)  I  requested  Titus, 
and  with  him  I  sent  the  brethren  :  did  Titus  pilfer 
any  thing  from  you?      Did  we  not  walk  in  one 


19 


20 


21 


spirit,  and  in  the  same  steps  ? 

Do  ye  again  suppose,  that  we  would  apologize 
to  you  ?  Before  God,  in  the  Messiah  we  speak : 
and  all  these  things,  my  beloved,  [are]  for  the  sake 
of  your  edification.  (20)  For  I  fear,  lest  I  should 
come  to  you  and  not  find  you  such  as  I  would 
wish  ;  and  lest  I  also  should  be  found  by  you,  such 
as  ye  would  not  wish  ;  lest  [there  should  be]  con- 
tention, and  envying,  and  anger,  and  obstinacy, 
and  slandering,  and  murmuring,  and  insolence,  and 
commotion  ;  (21)  lest,  when  I  come  to  you,  my 
God  should  humble  me  ;  and  I  should  mourn  over 
many,  who  have  sinned,  and  have  not  repented  of 
the  impurity,  the  whoredom,  and  the  lasciviousness, 
which  they  have  committed. 


XIII.  This  is  the  third  time  that  I  have  prepared  to 
come  to  you ;  that,  by  the  mouth  of  two  or  three 

2  witnesses,  every  word^^  may  be  established.  (2)  I 
have  before  said  to  you,  and  again  I  say  to  you 
beforehand,  (as  also  I  said  to  you  a  second  time, 
while  I  was  with  you  ;  and  now  also,  while  absent, 
I  write  to  those  who  have  sinned  and  to  the  others,) 

3  that  if  I  come  again,  I  will  not  spare  :  (3)  because 


Sy.  PI^ 


or,  thing,  ]^%D 


342 


2   CORINTHIANS,    XIII. 


or,  171. 


Sy. 

Sy. 


«Sy.VQ\^ 


ye  demand  proof,  that  it  is  the  Messiah  that  speak- 
eth  by  me,  who  hath  not  been  powerless  among 
you,  but  powerful  among  you.    (4)  For,  though  he     4 
was  crucilied  in  weakness,  yet  he  liveth  with''  the 
power  of  God.     We  also  are  weak  with  him  ;  yet 
we  are  alive  with  him,  by  that  power  of  God  which 
is  among  you.     (5)  Examine  yourselves,  whether     5 
ye  stand  in  the  faith:  prove  yourselves.     Do  ye 
not  acknowledge  that  Jesus  the  Msesiah  is  in  you? 
And  if  [he  is]  not,  ye  are  reprobates.     (6)  But,  I     6 
trust,  ye  will  know  that  we   are  not  reprobates. 
(7)  And  I  beseech  God,  that  there  may  be  no  evil     7 
in  yon ;  so  that  the  proof  of  us  may  appear  :  and 
3^et,  that  ye  may  be  doers  of  good  things,  though 
we  be  as  reprobates.     (8)  For  we  can  do  nothing     8 
against  the  truth,  but  [only]  for  the  truth.    (9)  And     9 
we  rejoice,  when  we  are  weak  and  ye  are  strong. 
And  this  also  we  pray  for,  that  ye  may  be  per- 
fected.c      (10)    Therefore,    while   absent,    I   write  10 
these  things ;  lest  when  I  come,  I  should  act  with 
rigor,  according  to  the  authority^  which  my  Lord 
hath  given  me  for  your  edification,  and  not  for  your 
destruction. 

Finally,  my  brethren,  rejoice,  and  be  perfected,  11 
and  be  comforted :  and  may  harmony  and  quiet- 
ness be  among  you ;  and  the  God  of  love  and  of 
peace   will    be   with    you. — (12)   Salute    ye    one  12 
another,  with  a  holy  kiss.     AH  the  saints  salute 
you.     (13)  The  peacc^  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Mes-  13 
siah,  and  the  love  of  God,  and  the  communion  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  be  with  you  all.     Amen. 


End  of  the  second  epistle  to  the  Corinthians :  which  was  written 
from  Philippi  of  Macedonia,  and  was  sent  by  the  hands  of 
Titus. 


The  Epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Galatians. 


I.  Paul,  a  legate,  not  from  men,  nor  by  man,  but 
by  Jesus  the  Messiah,  and  God  his  Father,  who 

2  raised  him  from  the  dead ;  (2)  and  all  the  brethren 
who  are  with  me  ;  unto  the  churches  which  are  in 

3  Galatia.  (3)  Grace  be  with  you,  and  peace,  from 
God  the  Father,  and  from  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Mes- 

4  siah;  (4)  who  gave  himself  for  our  sins,  that  he 
might  deliver  us  from  this  evil  world,  =»•  agreeably 

5  to  the  pleasure  of  God  our  Father :  (5)  to  whom 
be  glory  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 

6  I  admire,  how  soon  ye  have  turned  from  the 
Messiah,  who  called  you  by  his  grace,  unto  another 

7  gospel  ;^  (7)  which  doth  not  exist,  except  as  there 
are  some  who  would  disquiet  you,  and  are  disposed 

8  to  pervert  the  gospel  of  the  Messiah.  (8)  But  if 
we,  or  an  angel  from  heaven,  should  announce  to 
you  differently  from  what  we  have  announced  to 

9  you,  let  hini  be  accursed.^  (9)  As  I  have  just  said, 
and  now  I  again  say  it,  that  if  any  one  announce 
to  you  differently  from  what  ye  received,  let  him 

10  be  accursed.  (10)  For  do  I  now  persuade  men,  or 
God  ?  Or  do  I  seek  to  please  men  ?  For  if  I  had 
till  now  pleased  men,  I  should  not  have  been  a 

11  servant  of  the  Messiah. — (11)  But  I  make  known 
to  you,  my  brethren,  that  the  gospelf*  announced 

12  by  Ine,  was  not  from  man.  (12)  For  I  did  not  re- 
ceive it  and  learn  it  from  man,  but  [I  had  it]  by 

13  revelation  from  Jesus  the  Messiah.  (13)  For  ye 
have  heard  of  my  former  course  of  life  in  Judaism, 
that  I  persecuted  the  church  of  God  exceedingly, 

14  and  destroyed  it :  (14)  and  that  I  went  much  far- 
ther in  Judaism  than  many  of  my  contemporaries 
who  were  of  my  nation,  and  was  peculiarly  zealous 

15  for  the  doctrine  of  my  fathers.  (15)  But  when  it 
pleased  him,  who  separated  me  from  my  mother's 


344 


GALATIANS,   II. 


or,  in. 


^  Gr.  Peter. 


s  or,  by  face. 


^  or,  on  account 
of- 


Sy.  to  he  some- 
thing. 
or,  j)rhately. 

Sy. 

an  Aramaean. 


'  Sy.  U^-TD 

*  or,  to  he  some- 
thinnr. 


'  Gr.  Peter. 


womb,  and  called  me  bj  his  grace,  (16)  to  reveal  16 
his  Son  bye  me,  that  I  should  proclaim  him  among 
the  Gentiles ;  forthwith,  I  did  not  open  it  to  flesh 
and  blood;  (17)  nor  did  I  go  to  Jerusalem,  to  them  17 
who  were  legates  before  me ;  but  I  went  into  Ara- 
bia, and  returned  again  to    Damascus:    (18)    and  18 
after  three  years,  I  went  to  Jerusalem  to  see  Ce- 
plias;''    and  I    remained  with   him   fifteen   days. 
(19)  But  others  of  the  legates  I  saw  not,  except  19 
James,  our   Lord's  brother.      (20)   In  the   things  20 
which  I  am  writing  to  you,  behold,  before  God  !  I 
lie  not.     (21)  And  after  that,  I  went  to  the  regions  21 
of  Syria  and  Cilicia.     (22)  And   the  churches  in  22 
Juda3a  which  were  in  the  Messiah,  did  not  know 
me  personally  :g  (23)  but  this  only  had  they  heard,  23 
that  he  who  before  persecuted  us,  now  preacheth 
that  faith  which  in  time  preceding  he  subverted : 
(24)    and  they  glorified  God  in**   me. — (II.)  And  II. 
again,  after  fourteen  years,  I  went  up  to  Jerusalem 
with  Barnabas ;  and  I  took  with  me   Titus.     (2)     2 
And  I  went  up  by  revelation :  and  I  explained  to 
them  the  gospel  which  I  announce  among  the  Gen- 
tiles ;  and  I  stated  it  to  them  who  were  esteemed 
prorninent,a  between  myself  and   them:''    lest   I 
should  have  run,  or  might  run  in  vain.     (3)  Also     3 
Titus,  who  was  with  me,  and  was  a  Gentile,^  was 
not  compelled  to  be  circumcised.     (4)  And  in  re-     4 
gard  to  the  fiilse  brethren,  who  had  crept  .in  to  spy 
out  the  liberty  we  have  in  Jesus  the  Messiah,  in 
order  to  bring  me  under  subjection ;   (5)  not  for     5 
the  space  of  an  hour,  did  we  throw  ourselves  into 
subjection  to  them  ;  so  that  the  truth  of  the  gospel"! 
might  remain  with  you.     (6)  And  they  who  were     6 
esteemed  prominent,^  (what  they  were,  I  care  not; 
for  God  rcgardcth  not  the  persons  of  men,) — even 
these  persons  added  nothing  to  me.    (7)  But,  other-     7 
wise ;  for  they  saw,  that  the  gospel  of  the  uncir- 
cumcision  was  intrusted  to  me,  as  to  Cephas''  was 
intrusted  tliat  of  the  circumcision.    (8)  For  he  that     8 
was  operative  with  Cephas  in  the  legateship  of  the 
circumcision,  was  also  operative  with  me  in  the 
legateship  of  the  Gentiles.      (9)  And  James,  Ce-     9 
phas,  and  John,  who  were  accounted  ]-)illars,  when 
they  perceived  the  grace  that  was  given  to  me, 
gave  to  me  and  Barnabas  tlie  right  hand  of  fellow- 
ship ;  that  we  [should  labor]  among  the  Gentiles, 


GALATIANS,    III. 


845 


10  and  they  among  the  circumcision,  (10)  Only 
[thej  desired]  that  we  would  be  mindful  of  the 
needy ;  and  I  was  solicitous  to  do  the    same. — 

11  (11)  But  when  Cephas?  was  come  to  Antioch,  I 
rebuked  him  to  his  face ;  because  they  were  stum- 

12  bled  by  him.  (12)  For  before  certain  ones  came 
from  James,  he  ate  with  the  Gentiles :  but  when 
they  came,  he  withdrew  himself,  and  separated ; 
because  he  was  afraid  of  them  of  the  circumcision. 

13  (13)  And  the  rest  of  the  Jews  also  were  with  him 
in  this  thing;  insomuch  that  even  Barnabas  was 

11  induced  to  regard  persons.  (14)  And  Avhen  I  saw, 
that  thfiy  did  not  walk  correctly,  in  the  truth  of 
the  gospel, h  I  said  to  Cephas,  before  them  all  :  If 
thou  art  a  Jew,  and  livest  in  the  Gentile  way,  and 
not  in  the  Jewish,  why  dost  thou  compel  the  Gen- 

15  tiles  to  live  in  the  Jewish  way  ?  (15)  For  if  we, 
who  are  Jews  by  nature,  and  are  not  sinners  of  the 

16  Gentiles,  (16) — because  we  know  that  a  man  is  not 
made  just'  by  the  works  of  the  law,  but  by  faith  in 
Jesus  the  Messiah ; — even  we  have  believed  in 
Jesus  the  Messiah,  in  order  to  be  made  just  by- 
faith  in  the  Messiah,  and  not  by  the  works  of  the 
law :  for,  by  the  deeds  of  the  law,  no  flesh  is  made 

17  just.  (17)  And  if,  while  we  seek  to  become  just 
by  the  Messiah,  we  are  found  to  be  ourselves  sin- 
ners, is  Jesus  the  Messiah  Iherefore  the  minister  of 

18  sin  ?  Far  be  it !  (18)  For  if  I  should  build  up 
again  the  things  I  had  demolished,  I  should  show 

19  myself  to  be  a  transgressor  of  the  precept.  (19)  For 
I,  by  the  law,  have  become  dead  to  the  law,  that  I 
might  live  to  God  ;  and  I  am  crucified  with  the 

20  Messiah.  (20)  And  henceforth  it  is  no  more  I  who 
live,  but  the  Messiah  liveth  in  me :  and  the  life  I 
now  live  in  the  flesh,  I  live  by  faith  in  the  Son  of 

21  God,  who  loved  me  and  gave  himself  for  me.  (21)  I 
do  not  spurn  the  grace  of  God.  For  if  righteous- 
ness is  b}^  means  of  the  law,  the  Messiah  died  in 
vain. 

III.  0  ye  Galatians,  deficient  in  understanding ! 
Who  hath  fascinated  yon?  For  lo,  Jesus  the  Mes- 
siah hath  been  portrayed  as  in  a  picture,  crucified 
2  before  your  eyes.  (2)  This  only  would  I  learn 
from  you.  Was  it  by  works  of  the  law,  that  ye 
received  the  Spirit  ?  or  by  the  hearing  of  faith  ? 


5  Gr.  Peter. 


Sy. 


or,  justified. 


346 


GALATIANS,  III. 


Sy.p: 


''  or,  be  justified. 


•=  or,  is  justified. 
^  or,  be  sated. 


Sy.  "toA^j 


'  Sy.  ]»vAn 
3 


(3).  Are  je  so  foolish,  that  having  begun  in  the     3 
Spirit,  ye  now  would  consummate  in  the  flesh  ? 
(4)  And  have  3^e  borne  all  these  things  in  vain  ?     4 
And  I  would,  it  were  in  vain !     (5)  He  therefore     5 
who  giveth  the  Spirit  in  you,  and  who  worketh 
miracles^  among  you,  [doth  he  these  things]  by  the 
deeds  of  the  law  ?    or  by  the  hearing  of  faith  ? 
(6)  In  like  manner  Abraham  believed  God,  and  it     6 
was  accounted  to  him  for  righteousness.    (7)  Know     7 
ye,  therefore,  that  those  who  are  of  faith,  they  are 
the  children  of  Abraham.     (8)  For,  because  God     8 
knew  beforehand  that  the  Gentiles  would  be  made 
justly  by  faith,  he  preannounced  it  to  Abraham ;  as 
saith  the  holy  scripture,  In  thee  shall  all  nations  be 
blessed.     (9)  Believers,  therefore,  it  is,    who   are     9 
blessed  with  believing  Abraham.     (10)  For  they  10 
who  are  of  the  deeds  of  the  law,  are  under  the 
curse :  for  it  is  written,  Cursed  is  every  one  who 
shall   not    do   every   thing   written   in   this   law. 
(11)  And  that  no  one  becometh  just<=  before  God,  11 
by  the  law,  is  manifest :  because  it  is  written.  The 
just  by  fiith,  shall  live.<^     (12)  Now  the  law  is  not  12 
of  faith ;  but,  whoever  shall  do  the  things  Avritten 
in  it,  shall  live  by  them.     (13)  But  the  Messiah  13 
hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  and 
hath  been  a  curse  for  us ;  (for  it  is  written,  Cursed 
is  every  one  that  is  hanged  on  a  tree ;)  (14)  that  14 
the  blessing  of  Abraham  might  be  on  the  Gentiles, 
through  Jesus  the  Messiah ;  that  we  might  receive 
the  promise  of  the  Spirit  by  faith. — (15)  My  breth-  15 
ren,  I  speak  as  among  men;    a  man's  covenant«^ 
which  is  confirmed,  no  one  setteth  aside,  or  chan- 
geth  any  thing  in  it.     (16)  Now  to  Abraham  was  10 
the  promise  made,  and  to  his  seed.     And  it  said  to 
him,  not,  to  thy  seeds,  as  being  many ;  but  to  th}- 
seed,  as  being  one,  which  is  the  Messiah.     (17)  And  17 
this  I  say  :  That  the  covenant  which  was  previously 
confirmed  by  God  in  the  Messiah,  the  law  wliich 
was  four  hundred  and  thirty  years  after,  cannot  set 
it  aside,  and  nullify  the  promise.     (18)  And  if  the  IS 
inheritance  were  by  the  law,  it  would  not  be  by 
promise  :  but  God  gave  it  to  Abraham  by  promise. 

What  then  is  the  law?     It  was  added  on  ac-  19 
count   of  •  transgression,    until    that    seed    should 
come,  to  whom  belonged  the  promise :    and  the 
law   was  given   by  angels  through   a   mediator,*" 


GALATIANS,    IV. 


847 


23 


24 


26 

27 

28 
29 


20  (20)  Now  a  mediator  is  not  of  one ;  but  God  is 

21  one.  (21)  Is  the  law  then  opposed  to  tlie  promise 
of  God?  Far  be  it.  For  if  a  law  had  been 
given,  which,  could  make   alive,?  certainly,  righ- 

22  teousness  would  have  been  by  tlie  law.  (22)  But 
the  scripture  hath  inclosed  all  under  sin,  that  the 
promise  by  faith  in  Jesus  the  Messiah  might  be 
given  to  them  that  believe.  (23)  But  before  the 
faith  came,  the  law  kept  us  sliut  up  unto  the  faith 
that  was  to  be  revealed.  (21)  The  law,  therefore, 
was  a  monitor^  for  us  unto  the  Messiah,  that  we 

25  might  become  just'  by  faith.  (25)  But  the  faith 
having  come,  we  are  not  under  the  monitor. 
(26)  For  ye  are  all  the  children  of  God,  by  faith  in 
Jesus  the  Messiah.  (27)  For  they  who  have  been 
baptized  into  the  Messiah,  have  put  on  the  Messiah. 
(28)  There  is  neither  Jew  nor  Gentile,  neither 
slave  nor  free-born,  neither  male  nor  female ;  for 
ye  are  all  one  in  Jesus  the  Messiah.  (29)  And  if 
ye  are  the  Messiah's,  then  are  ye  the  seed  of  Abra- 

IV  ham,  and  heirs  by  the  promise. — (IV.)  But  I  say, 
that  the  heir,  so  long  as  he  is  a  child,  differeth  not 

2  from  a  servant,  although  he  is  lord  of  all ;  (2)  but 
he  is  under  supervisors  and  stewards,  \mtil  the  time 

3  established  by  his  father.  (3)  So  also  we,  while 
we  were  children,  were  in  subordination  under  the 

4  elements=i  of  the  world.  (4)  But  when  the  consum- 
mation of  the  time  arrived,  God  sent  forth  his  Son  ; 
and  he  was  from  a  woman,  and  was  under  the  law ; 

5  (5)  that  he  might  redeem  them  that  were  under  the 
law ;  and  that  we  might  receive  the  adoption  of 

6  sons.  (6)  And,  because  ye  are  sons,  God  hath  sent 
forth  the  Spirit  of  his  Son  into  your  hearts,  who 

7  crieth.  Father,  our  Father. ^  (7)  Wherefore,  ye 
are  no  longer  servants,  but  sons  ;  and  if  sons,  then 

8  heirs  of  God,  through  Jesus  the  Messiah.  (8)  For 
then,  when  ye  knew  not  God,  ye  served  them  who 

9  in  their  nature  are  not  gods.  (9)  But  now,  since 
ye  have  known  God,^ — ^or  rather,  have  been  known 
by  God,  ye  turn  yourselves  again  to  the  weak  and 
beggarly  elements,  and  wish  again  to  be  under 
them !     (10)  Ye  observe  da}" s  and  moons,  and  set 


times,  and  years  !     (H)  I  am  afraid,  lest  I  have 


10 
11 

12  labored  among  you  in  vain.     (12)  Be  ye  like  me; 
because  I  have  been  like  you. 

My  brethren,  I  beseech  you.     Ye  have  not  in- 


s  or,  save. 


»  Sy.  ]]yl 

'  or,  he  justified. 


^Sy. 


Gr. 


^Sy. 


348 


GALATIANS,    IV. 


'  Sy.  ]L'\]£i  = 
allegories. 


jured  me  at  all.     (13)  For  je  know,  that  under  the  13 
infirmity  of  my  flesh,  I  at  first  announced  the  gos- 
pel to  you ;  (14)  and  the  trial  in  my  flesh,  ye  did  14 
not  despise  nor  nauseate:  but  ye  received  me  as 
an  angel  of  God,  and  as  Jesus  the  Messiah.     (15)  15 
Where  then  is  your  blessedness?     For  I  testify  of 
you,  that  if  it  had  been  possible,  ye  would  have 
plucked  out  your  eyes,  and  have  given  them  to 
me.     (16)  Have  I  become  an  enemy  to  you,  by  16 
preaching  to  you  the  truth  ? — (17)  They  are  zealous  17 
towards  you,  yet  not  for  good ;  but  they  wish  to 
shut  you  up,  that  ye  may  be  zealous  towards  them. 
(18)  And  it  is  a  good  thing  to  be  zealous  at  all  18 
times  in  good  things ;  and  not  merely  when  I  am 
present  with  you.     (19)  [Ye  are]  my  children,  of  19 
whom  I  travail  in  birth  again,  till  the  Messiah  be 
formed  in  you.     (20)  And  I  could  wish  to  be  now  20 
with  you,  and  to  change  the  tone  of  my  voice  ;  be- 
cause I  am  astonished  at  you. — (21)  Tell  me,  ye  21 
who  desire  to  be  under  the  law,  do  ye  not  hear  the 
law?     (22)  For  it  is  written,  that  Abraham  had  22 
two  sons,  one  by  the  bondmaid,  and  one  by  the 
free  woman.     (23)  But  he  that  was  by  the  bond-  23 
maid,  was  born  after  the  flesh  ;  and  he  that  was  by 
the  free  woman,  was  by  the  promise.     (24)  And  24 
these  are  allegorical<=  of  the  two  covenants  i^i  the 
one  from  mount  Sinai,  which   bringeth  forth  for 
bondage,  is  Hagar.     (25)  For  Ilagar  is  the  mount  25 
Sinai  in  Arabia,  and  correspondeth  with  the  pres- 
ent Jerusalem,  and  is  serving  in  bondage,  she  and 
her  children.     (26)  But  the  Jerusalem  above,  is  the  26 
free  woman,  who  is  the  mother  of  us.     (27)  For  27 
it  is  written,  Be  joyful,  thou  barren,  who  bearest 
not:  exult  and  shout,  thou  who  hast  not  travailed : 
for  more  numerous  are  the  children  of  the  desolate 
than  the  children  of  the  married  woman.    (28)  Now  28 
we,  my  brethren,  like  Isaac,  are  the  children  of  the 
promise.     (29)  And  as  then,  he  that  was  born  after  29 
the  flesh,  persecuted  him  [who  was  born]  of  the 
Spirit;  so  also  [is  it]  now.     (30)  But  what  saith  30 
the  scripture  ?     Cast  out  the  bondmaid,  and   her 
son;  because  the  son  of  the  bondmaid  shall  not  in- 
herit with  the  son  of  the  free  woman.     (31)  So  31 
then,  my  brethren,  we  are  not  sons  of  the  bond- 
woman, but  sons  of  the  free  woman. 


GALATIANS,    V. 


849 


Y.  Stand  fast,  therefore,  in  the  liberty  with  which 
the  Messiah  hath  made  us  free ;  and  be  not  sub- 

2  jected  again  to  the  yoke  of  bondage.  (2)  Behold, 
I  Paul  say  to  you.  That  if  ye  become  circumcised, 

3  the  Messiah  is  of  no  advantage  to  you.  (3)  And 
again,  I  testify  to  every  one  who  becometh  circum- 
cised, that  he  is  bound^i  to  falfill  the  whole  law. 

4  (4)  Ye  have  renounced  the  Messiah,  ye  who  seek 
justification  by  the  law:  and  ye  have  apostatized 

5  from  grace.  (5)  For  we,  through  the  Spirit,  which 
is  from  faith,  are  waiting  for  the  hope  of  righteous- 

6  ness.  (6)  For,  in  the  Messiah  Jesus,  circumcision 
is  nothing,  neither  is  uncircumcision,  but  the  faith 

7  that  is  perfected  by  love.  (7)  Ye  did  run  well : 
who  hath  interrupted  you,  that  ye  acquiesce  not  in 

8  the  truth  ?     (8)  The  bias  of  your  mind''  is  not  from 

9  him  who  called  you.     (9)  A  little  leaven  leaveneth 

10  the  whole  mass.  (10)  I  confide  in  you  through 
our  Lord,  that  ye  will  entertain  no  other  thoughts. 
And  he  that  disquieteth  you,  shall  bear  liis  judg- 

11  ment,  whoever  he  may  be.  (11)  And  I,  my  breth- 
ren, if  I  still  preached  circumcision,  wh}^  should  I 
suffer  persecution  ?  Hath  the  offensiveness  of  the 
cross  ceased  ?  (12)  But  I  would,  that  they  who 
disquiet  you,  were  actually  put  oft> 

And  ye,  my  brethren,  have  been  called  into 
liberty :  only  let  not  your  liberty  be  an  occasion  to 
the  flesh;  but,  by  love,  be  ye  servants  to  each 
other.  (14)  For  the  whole  law  is  fulfilled  in  one 
sentence  j*^  in  this.  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as 

15  thyself.  (15)  But  if  ye  bite  and  devour  one 
another,  beware,  lest  ye  be  consumed  one  by  anoth- 

16  er. — (16)  And  I  say  :  Walk  ye  in  the  Spirit ;  and 

17  never  follow^  the  cravings  of  the  flesh.  (17)  For 
the  flesh  craveth  that  which  is  repugnant  to  the 
Spirit ;  and  the  Sprit  craveth  that  which  is  repug- 
nant to  the  flesh  :  and  the  two  are  the  opposites  of 
each  other,  so  that  ye  do  not  that  which  ye  desire. 

18  (18)  But  if  ye  are  guided  by  the  Spirit,  ye  are  not 

19  under  the  law.  (19)  For  tlie  works  of  the  flesh  are 
known,  which  are  whoredom,  impurity,  lascivious- 

20  ness,  (20)  idol- worship,  magic,  malice,  contention, 

21  rivalry,  wrath,  strife,  divisions,  discords,  (21)  envy, 
murder,  drunkenness,  revelling,  and  all  the  like 
things.  And  they  who  perpetrate  these  things,  as 
I  have  before  told  you,  and  also  now  tell  you,  do 


12 


14 


"  Sy.  onij^? 


Sy. 


S_y.  cutting 
were  cut  off. 


^  or,  ivord. 


^  or,  do. 


350 


GALATIANS,    VI. 


or,  affections. 


or,  reclaim. 


*>  or,  hj  wliiclu 


not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God.     (22)   But   the  22 
fruits  of  the  Spirit  are,  love,  joy,  peace,  long  suffer- 
ing, suavity,  kindness,  fidelity,  modesty,  patience. 
(23)  Against  these  there  standeth  no  law.    (24)  And  23 
they  who  are  of  the  Messiah,  have  crucified  their  24 
flesh,  with  all  its  passions'"  and  its  cravings.     (25)  25 
Let  us  therefore  live  in  the  Spirit ;  and  let  us  press 
on  after  the  Spirit.     (26)  And  let  us  not  be  vain-  26 
glorious,  despising  one  another,  and  envying  one 
another. 

My  brethren,  if  one  of  you  should  be  overtaken  YI. 
in  a  fault,  do  ye  who  are  of  the  Spirit  recover^  him, 
in  a  spirit  of  meekness  :  and  be  ye  cautious,  lest  ye 
also  be  tempted.     (2)  And  bear  ye  one  another's     2 
burdens,  that  so  3'e  ma}^  fulfill  the  law  of  the  Mes- 
siah.    (3)  For  if.  any  one  thinketh  himself  to  be     3 
something,  when  he  is  not,  he  deceiveth  himself 
(4)  But  let  a  man  examine  his  own  conduct;  and     4 
then  his  glorying  will  be  within  himself,  and  not 
in  others.     (5)  For  every  man  must  take  up  his     5 
own  load. — (6)  And  let  him  that  heareth  the  word,     6 
communicate  to  him  who  instructcth  him,  in  all 
good  things. — (7)  Do  not  mistake  ;  God  is  not  de-     7 
ceived ;  for  what  a  man  sowcth,  that  also  will  he 
reap.     (8)  He  who  soWeth   in   the   flesh,  reapeth     8 
from  the  flesh  corruption:  and  he  who  soweth  in 
the  Spirit,  will  from  the  Spirit  reap  life  everlasting. 
(9)  And  while  we  do  what  is  good,  let  it  not  be     9 
wearisome  to  us ;  for  the  time  Avill  come  when  we 
shall  reap,  and  it  will  not  be  tedious  to  us.     (10)  10 
Now,  therefore,  while  we  have  the  opportunity,  let 
us  practice  good  works  towards  all  men,  and  espe- 
cially towards  them  of  the  household  of  fiith. 

Behold,  this  epistle  have  I  written  to  you  with  11 
my  own  hand.     (12)  They  who  are   disposed  to  12 
glory  in  the  flesh,  they  urge  you  to  become  circum- 
cised, only  that   they  may  not  be  persecuted  on 
account  of  the  cross  of  the   Messiah.      (13)  For  13 
not  even  they  themselves,  who  are   circumcised, 
keep  the  law :  but  they  wish  you  to  become  cir- 
cumcised,   that    they   may  glory   in   your   flesh. 
(14)  But  as  for  me,  let  me  not  glory,  except  in  the  14 
cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah ;  by  whom^ 
the  world  is  crucified  to  me,  and  I  am  crucified  to 
the  world.     (15)  For  circumcision  is  nothing ;  nei-  15 


EPHESIANS,    I. 


351 


16  tlier  is  uncircumcision  ;  but  a  new  creation. ^  (16) 
And  they  who  press  forward  in  this  path,  peace  be 
on  them,  and  mercy  ;  and  on  the  Israel  of  God, — 

17  (17)  Henceforth  let  no  one  put  trouble  upon  me ; 
for  I  bear  in  my  body  the  marks  of  our  Lord  Jesus 

18  the  Messiah. — (18)  My  brethren,  the  grace  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  be  with  your  spirit. 
Amen. 

End  of  the  Epislle  to  the  Galalians  ;  which  was  written  from 
Rome. 


-Sy. 


The  Epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Ephesians. 


L  Paul,  a  legate  of  Jesus  the  Messiah  by  the  pleas- 
ure of  God,  to  them  who  are  at  Ephesus,  sanctified, 

2  and  believing  in  Jesus  the  Messiah :  (2)  Peace  be 
with  you,  and  grace  from  God  our  Father,  and 
from  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah. 

3  Blessed  be  God,  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the 
Messiah,  who  hath  blessed  us  with  all  blessings  of 

4  the  Spirit  in  heaven,  by  the  Messiah :  (4)  accord- 
ing as  he  had  previously  chosen^^  us  in  him,  before 
the  foundation  of  the  world,  that  we  might  be  holy 
and  Avithout  blame  before  him ;  and,  in  love,  pre- 

5  destiuated''  us  for  himself;  (5)  and  adopted  us  for 
sons,  in  Jesus  the  Messiah,  as  was  agreeable  to  his 

6  pleasure  :  (6)  that  the  glory  of  his  grace  might  be 
glorified,  which  he  poured  upon  us  by  his  Beloved 

7  One  ;  (7)  by  whom  we  have  redemption, <=  and  the 
forgiveness  of  sins  by  his  blood,  according  to  the 

8  riches  of  his  grace,  (8)  which  hath  abounded  in 
us,  in  all  wisdom  and  all  spiritual  understanding. 

9  (9)  And  he  hath  made  us  know  the  mystery  of  his 
pleasure,  which  he  had  before  determined  in  him- 

10  self  to  accomplish,  (10)  in  the  dispensation  of  the 
fullness  of  times ;  that  all  things  might  again  be 
made  new  in  the  Messiah,  things  in  heaven  and 


^  Sy.  ,_1dj5 
<=  Sy.  ]jL05a2) 


352 


EPHESIANS,    II. 


<=  Sy. 


or,  salvation. 


s  or,  are  saved. 


Sy.p. 


Sy.  Im^y 


11 


12 
13 


u 


[things]  on  earth.  (11)  And  in  him  we  are  elected,'! 
according  as  he  predestined^  us  and  willed,  who 
workcth  all  things  according  to  the  counsel  of  his 
pleasure ;  (12)  that  we  should  be  they  who  first 
hoped  in  the  Messiah,  to  the  honor  of  his  glorj. 
(13)  In  Avhom,  ye  also  have  heard  the  word  of 
truth,  which  is  the  gospel  of  your  life,^  and  have 
believed  in  him ;  and  have  been  sealed  with  the 
Holy  Spirit,  who  was  promised,  (14)  who  is  the 
earnest  of  our  inheritance,  until  the  redemption  of 
them  that  are  alive,^  and  for  the  praise  of  his  glory. 

Therefore,  lo  I  also,  since  I  heard  of  your  faith  15 
in  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  and  of  3'our  love 
towards  all  the  saints,  (16)  cease  not  to  give  thanks  16 
on  your  account,  and  to  remember  you  in  my  pray- 
ers ;  (17)  that  the  God  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Mes-  17 
siah,  the  Father  of  glory,  may  give  to  you  the 
Spirit  of  wisdom  and  of  revelation,  in  the  recogni- 
tion of  him  ;  (18)  and  that  the  eyes  of  your  hearts  18 
may  be  enlightened,  so  that  ye  may  know  what  is 
the  hope  of  his  calling,  and  what  the  riches  of  the 
glory  of  his  inheritance  in  the  saints;    (19)  and  19 
what  is  the  excellence  of  the  majesty  of  his  power^ 
in  us  who  believe ;  according  to  the  efficiency  of 
the  strength  of  his  power,  (20)  which  he  put  forth  20 
in  the  Messiah,  and  raised  him  from  the  dead,  and 
seated  him  at  his  right  hand  in  heaven,  (21)  high  21 
above  all  principalities,  and  authorities,  and  powers, 
and  lordships,  and  above  every  name  that  is  named, 
not  only  in  this  world  but  also  in  that  to  come : 
(22)  and  he  hath  subjected  all  things  under  his  22 
feet ;  and  hath  given  him  who  is  high  over  all,  to 
be  the  head  of  the  church ;'  (23)  which  is  his  body,  23 
and    the  fullness  of  him    who  filleth  all  in  all : 
(11.)  and  also  you,  [he  filleth,]  who  were  dead  in  II. 
your  sins,  and  in  your  offences,  (2)  in  the  which     2 
ye  before  walked,  according  to  the  worldliness  of 
this  world,  and  according  to  the  pleasure  of  the 
prince  potentate  of  the  air,  that  spirit  which  is  ac- 
tive in  the  children  of  disobedience :  (3)  in  which     3 
deeds  we  also,  formerly,  were  conversant,  in  the 
cravings  of  our  flesh ;  and  we  did  the  pleasure  of 
our  flesh,  and  of  our  mind,  and  were  altogether  the 
children  of  wrath,  like  the  rest.     (1)  But  God  who     4 
is  rich  in  his  mercies,  because  of  the  great  love  with 
which  he  loved  us,  (5)  when  we  were  dead  in  our     5 


EPHESIANS,    III. 


353 


sins,  quickened  us  with  the  Messiah,  and  rescued^ 

6  us  by  his  grace ;  (6)  and  resuscitated  us  with  him, 
and  seated  us  with  him  in  heaven,  in  Jesus  the 

7  Messiah :  (7)  that  he  might  show  to  the  coming 
ages''  the  magnitude  of  the  riches  of  his  grace,  and 
his  benignity  towards  us  in   Jesus  the  Messiah. 

8  (8)  For  it  is  by  his  grace  we  are  rescued,  through 
faith ;  and  this  is  not  of  yourselves,  but  it  is  the 

9  gift  of  God :  (9)  not  of  works,  lest  any  one  glory. 

10  (10)  For  we  are  his  creation ;''-  who  are  created  in 
Jesus  the  Messiah,  for  good  works,  which  God  hath 
before  prepared  for  us  to  walk  in. 

11  Wherefore  be  mindful,  that  ye  formerly  were 
carnal  Gentiles ;  and  ye  were  called  the  uncircum- 
cision,  by  that  which  is  called  the  circumcision, 
and  which  is  the  work  of  the  hands  in  the  flesh. 

12  (12)  And  ye  were,  at  that  time,  without  the  Mes- 
siah ;  and  were  aliens  from  the  regulations'^  of  Is- 
rael ;  and  strangers  to  the  covenant  of  the  promise ; 
and  were  without  hope,  and  without  God,  in  the 

13  world.  (18)  But  now,  by  Jesus  the  Messiah,  ye  who 
before  were  afar  off,  have  been  brought  near  by  the 

11  blood  of  the  Messiah.  (14)  For  he  is  himself  our 
peace,  s  who  hath  made  the  two  [become]  one,  and 
hath  demolished  the  wall  Avhich  stood  in  the  midst, 

15  and  the  enmity,  by  his  flesh ;  (15)  and  by  his 
prescriptions  he  hath  abolished  the  lav\r  of  ordi- 
nances ;  that,  in  himself,  he  might  make  the  two  to 

IG  be  one  new  man  ;  and  he  hath  made  peace,  (16) 
and  hath  reconciled'"  both  with  God,  in?  one  body, 

17  and  hath  slain  the  enmity  by  his  cross.  (17)  And 
he  came,  and  proclaimed  peace  to  you  afar  off,  and 

18  to  those  near :  (18)  because,  by  him  there  is  access 

19  for  us  both,  by  one  Spirit,  unto  the  Father. — (19) 
Wherefore,  ye  are  not  strangers,  nor  sojourners, 
but  ye  are  fellow-citizens  with  the  saints,  and  of  the 

20  household  of  God.  (20)  And  ye  are  built  upon  the 
foundations  of  the  legates  and  the  prophets ;  and 
Jesus  the  Messiah  hath  become  the  head  of  the 

21  corner  in  the  edifice.  (21)  And  in  him  all  the 
edifice  is  framed  together,  and  groweth  into  a  holy 

22  temple  in  the  Lord ;  (22)  while  ye  also  are  builded 
in  him,  for  a  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit. 

III.     On  this  account,  I  Paul  am  a  prisoner  of  Jesus 
2  the  Messiah,  for  the  sake  of  you  Gentiles  :  (2)  if  so 


*  Sy.  ^^ 

Sy.  ]^r^ 


Sy.  11^05 


or,  peace- 
maker. 


Sy.  ^xl.5 

or,  bij. 


854 


EPHESIANS,    III. 


Sy.  sons. 


Sy. 


Sy.  ]]. 


"  Sy.  full  of 
diversiiies. 

^  or,  prepared. 


'  i.  e.  faith  in 
him. 


e  Sy-IZoairD") 


or,  power 
above  all. 


be,  ye  have  heard  of  the  dispensation  of  the  grace 
of  God,  which  was  given  to  me  among  you  :  (3)  that     3 
by  revelation  there  was  made  known  to  me  the 
mystery,  (as  I  have  [now]  written  to  you  in  brief, 
(4)  so  that  while  ye  read,  ye  might  bo  able  to  un-     4 
derstand  my  knowledge  of  the  mystery  of  the  Mes- 
siah,)— (5)    which  in    other   generations   was    not     5 
made  known  to  the  sons  of  men,  as  it  is  now  re- 
vealed to  his  holy  legates  and  to  his  prophets,  by 
the  Spirit ;  (6)  that  the  Gentiles  should  be  sharers'^     6 
of  his  inheritance,  and  partakers  of  his  body,  and 
of  the  promise  which  is  given  in  him  by  the  gos-     7 
pel;'^  (7)  of  Avhich  I  have  been  a  minister,  accord- 
ing to  the  gift  of  the  goodness  of  God,  which  was 
imparted  to  me  by  the  operation  of  his  power  i*^ — 
(8)  to  me,  who  am  the  least  of  all  the  saints,  hath     8 
this  grace   been   given,  that  I  s'^ould  announce 
among  the  Gentiles  the  unsearchable  riches  of  the 
Messiah,  (9)  and  should  show  to  all  men  what  is     9 
the  dispensation  of  the  m3^stery,  which  for  ages  was 
hid  up  in  God  the  Creator  of  all  [things]  :  (10)  so  10 
that,  by  means  of  the  church,  the  manifold'^  wisdom 
of  God  might  become  known  to  the  principalities 
and  powers  that  are  in  heaven:  (11)  which  [wis- 
dom] he  arranged<2  ages  before,  and  he  hath  execu- 
ted it  by  Jesus  the  Messiah  our  Lord ;  (12)  through  12 
whom  we  have  boldness  and  access,  in  the  confi- 
dence of  his  faith.^    (13)  Therefore  I  pray,  that  I  13 
may  not  be  discouraged  by  my  afflictions,  which 
arc  for  your  sakes ;  for  this  is  3^our  glory.     (14)  And  14 
I  bow  my  knees  to  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
the  Messiah,  (15)  from  whom  the  whole  flimilys:  in 
heaven  and  on  earth  is  named ;  (16)  that  he  would 
grant  you,  according  to  the  riches  of  his  glory,  to 
be  strengthened  with  might  by  his  Spirit ;  that  in 
your  inner  man  (17)  the  Messiah  may  dwell  by 
faith,  and  in  your  hearts  by  love,  while  your  root 
and  your  foundation  waxeth  strong ;  (18)  and  that  18 
ye  may  be  able  to  explore,  with  all  the  saints,  what 
is  the  height  and  depth,  and  length  and  breadth, 
(19)  and  may  know  the  greatness  of  the  Messiah's  19 
love ;  and  [that]  ye  may  be  filled  with  all  the  full- 
ness of  God. — (20)  Now  to  him  who  is  able,  by  his  20 
almightv  power,''  to  do  for  us  even  more  than  we 
ask  or  think,  according  to  his  power  that  workcth 
in  us;  (21)  to  him  be  glory,  in  his  church,  by  Je-  21 


11 


15 
16 


17 


EPHESIANS,    IV. 


855 


sus  the  Messiah,  in  all  generations,  for  ever   and 
ever.     Amen. 

IV.  I  therefore,  a  prisoner  in  our  Lord,  beseech  of 
you,  that  ye  walk,  (as  it  becometh  the  calling  where- 

2  with  ye  are  called,)  (2)  with  all  lowliness  of  mind, 
and  quietness,  and  long  suftering ;  and  that  ye  be 

3  forbearing  one  towards  another,  in  love.     (3)  And 
be  ye  solicitous  to  keep  the  unity^  of  the  Spirit,  in 

4  a  bond  of  peace ;  (4)  so  that  ye  may  become  one 
body,  and  one  Spirit ;  even  as  ye  are  called  unto  one 

5  hope  of  your  calling.     (5)  For,  the  Lord  is  one,  and 

6  the  faith  one,  and  the  baptism  one ;  (6)  and  one  God 
is  the  Father  of  all,  and  over  all,  and  by  all,  and  in 

7  us  all. — (7)  xlnd  to  each  of  us  grace  is  given,  ac- 
cording to  the  measure  of  the  gift  of  the  Messiah. 

8  (8)  Wherefore  it  is  said  :  He  ascended  on  high,  and 
carried  captivity  captive,  and  gave  gifts  to  men. 

9  (9)  Now  that  he  ascended,  what  is  it  but  that  he 
also  previously  descended  to  the  inferior  [regions] 

10  of  the  earth  ?  (10)  He  Avho  descended,  is  also  the 
same  that  ascended  up,  high  above  all  the  heavens, 

11  that  he  might  fulfill^  all  things.  (11)  And  he  gave 
some,  legates ;  and  some,  prophets ;  and  some, 
evangelists;'^    and  some,    pastors'^    and   teachers:^ 

12  (12)  for  perfecting  the  saints,  for  the  work  of  the 
ministry,  for  the  edification  of  the  body  of  the  Mes- 

13  siah  ;  (13)  until  we  all  become  one  and  the  same,^ 
in  faith  and  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God, 
and  one  complete  man  according  to  the  measure  of 

14  the  stature  of  the  fullness  of  Messiah :  (14)  and  that 
we  might  not  be  children,  agitated  and  turned 
about  by  every  wind  of  the  crafty  doctrines  of  men 

15  who  plot  to  seduce  by  their  subtilty  :  (15)  but  that 
we  might  be  established  in  our  love;  and  that 
every  thing  in  us  might  progress  in  the  Messiah, 

16  who  is  the  head:  (16)  and  from  him  [it  is],  the 
whole  body  is  framed  together  and  compacted  by 
all  the  junctures,  according  to  the  gift  that  is  im- 
parted by  measure  to  each  member,  for  the  growth 
of  the  body ; — that  his  edifice  may  be  perfected  in 
love. 

17  And  this  I  say,  and  testify  in  the  Lord,  that 
henceforth  ye  walk  not  as  the  other  Gentiles,  who 

18  walk  in  the  vanity  of  their  mind :  (18)  and  they 
are  dark  in  their  understandings,  and  are  alienated 


Sy.  "jZo-.o'l 


•'  Sy.ioXa-Jj 
"=  Sy. 

^  Sy.  ]LaLy 
e  Sy.  ]l  <?l\V> 
•■  Sy.  iOrk)  ,a^ 


856 


EPHESIANS,   V. 


e  Sy. 

under  slandiiis;s. 


Gr.  to  the 
Devil. 


Sy.  word, 
speech. 


»  Sy.  it. 
^  Sy.  he  named 
to  name. 


from  the  life  of  God,  because  there  is  not  in  them 
knowledge,  and  because  of  the  blindness  of  their 
heart.     (19)  They  have   cut  off  their   hope,   and  19 
have  given  themselves  over  to  lasciviousness,  and 
to  the  practice  of  all  uncleanne.ss  in  their  greediness. 

(20)  But   ye   have   not  so   learned  the  Messiah ;  20 

(21)  if  ye  have  truly  heard  him,  and  by  him  have  21 
learned  as  the  truth  is  in  Jesus.    (22)  Bat  [ye  have  22 
learned],  that  ye  should  lay  aside  your  former  prac- 
tices, the  old  man  that  is  corrupted  with  the  lusts 

of  error ;  (23)  and  should  be  renewed  in  the  spirit  23 
of  your  minds  ;§•  (2-1)  and  should  put  on  the  new  24 
man,  that  is  created  by  God  in  righteousness  and 
in  the  holiness  of  truth. — (25)  Wherefore,  put  away  2d 
from  you  lying,  and  speak  ye  the  truth  each  with 
his  neighbor;  for  we  are  members  one  of  another. 
— (26)  Be  ye  angry,  and  sin  not:  and  let  not  the  26 
sun  go  down  upon  your  wrath.     (27)  And  give  no  27 
place   to    the  Accuser. ^ — (28)  And  let   him   that  28 
stole,  steal  no  more;  but  let  him  labor  with  his 
hands,  and  do  good  acts ;    that  he  may  have  to 
give  to  him  who  needeth. — (29)  Lot  no  hateful  Ian-  29 
guage'  come  from  your  mouth,  but  that  which  is 
decorous,  and  useful  for  edification,  that  it  may 
convey  grace  to  those  who  hear,     (30)  And  grieve  30 
not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  whereby  ye  are  sealed 
for  the  day  of  redemption. — (31)  Let  all  bitterness,  31 
and  anger,  and  wrath,  and  clamoring,  and  reviling, 
be  taken  from  you,  with  all  malice :  (32)  and  be  32 
ye  affectionate   towards  one  another,  and  sympa- 
thetic ;  and  forgive  ye  one  another,  as  God  by  the 
]\Iessiah  hath  forgiven  us.     (V.)  Be  ye   therefore  Y. 
imitators  of  God,  as  dear  children :  (2)  and  walk  in     2 
love ;  as  the  Messiah  also  hath  loved  us,  and  hath 
given  up  himself  for  us,  an  offering  and  a  sacrifice 
to  God,  for  a  sweet  odor. 

But  whoredom,  and  all  impurity,  and  avarice,     3 
let  them"^  not  be  at  all  heard  of  i^  among  you,  as 
it  becometh  the  saints ;  (4)  Neither  obscenities,  nor     4 
words  of  folly,  or  of  division,  or  of  scurrility,  which 
are  not  useful ;  but  instead  of  these,  thanksgiving. 
(5)  For  this  know  ye,  that  every  man  who  is  a     5 
whoremonger,  or  impure,  or  avaricious,  or  a  wor- 
shipper of  idols,  hath  no  inheritance  in  the  king- 
dom of  the  Messiah  and  of  God.     ((>)  Let  no  man     6 
deceive  you  with  vain  words ;    for  it  is  on  account 


EPHESIANS,    V. 


357 


of  these  things  that  the  wrath  of  God  cometh  on 

7  the  children  of  disobedience.     (7)  Therefore  be  ye 

8  not  like  them.     (8)  For  ye  were  heretofore  dark- 
ness, but  now  are  ye  light  in  our  Lord  :  therefore, 

9  as  the  children  of  light,  so  walk  ye.     (9)  For  the 
fruits  of  the  light  are  in  all  goodness,  and  righteous- 

10  ness,   and   truth.     (10)    And   search   out  what  is 

11  pleasing  before  our  Lord:  (11)  And  have  no  com- 
merce   with    the    works   of    darkness   which    are 

12  unfruitful,  but  reprove  them.  (12)  For  the  things 
they  do  in  secret,  it  is   nauseous  even  to  mention. 

13  (13)  For  all  things  are  exposed  and  made  manifest 
by  the  light:    and  whatever  maketh  manifest,''  is 

14  light.  (11)  Wherefore  it  is  said  :  Awake  thou  that 
sleepest,  and  arise  from  the  dead,  and  the  Messiah 

15  will  illuminate  thee.     (15)  See  therefore,  that  ye 

16  walk  circumspectly ;  not  like  the  simple,  (16)  but 
like   the  wise,   who  purchase   their  opportunity; 

17  because  the  days  are  evil.  (17)  Therefore,  be  not 
lacking  in  understanding  ;  but  understand  ye  what 

18  is  the  pleasure  of  God.  (18)  And  be  not  drunk 
with  wine,  in  which  is  dissoluteness;'^  but  be  ye 
filled  with  the  spirit.  (19)  And  converse  with 
yourselves^  in  psalms  and  hymns;  and  with  your 
hearts  sing  to  the  Lord,  in  spiritual  songs.  (20) 
And  give  thanks  to  God  the  Father,  at  all  times, 
for  all  men,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the 
Messiah.  (21)  And  be  submissive  one  to  another, 
in  the  love  of  the  Messiah. 

Wiv^es,  be  ye  submissive  to  your  husbands,  as  to 
our  Lord.  (23)  Because  the  husband  is  the  head 
of  the  wife,  even  as  the  Messiah  is  the  head  of  the 
21:  church ;  and  he  is  the  vivifier^  of  the  body.  (24) 
And  as  the  church  is  subject  to  the  Messiah,  so 
also  let  wives  be  to  their  husbands  in  all  things. 

25  (25)  Husbands,  love  your  wives,  even  as  the  Mes- 
siah loved  his  church,  and  delivered  himself  up  for 

26  it;  (26)  that  he  might  sanctify  it,  and  cleanse  it, 

27  by  the  washing  of  water,  and  by  the  word ;  (27) 
and  might  constitute  it  a  glorious  church  for  him- 
self, in  which  is  no  stain,  and  no  wrinkle,  and 
nothing  like  them  ;  but  that  it  might  be  holy  and 

28  without  blemish.  (28)  It  behooveth  men  so  to  love 
their  wives,  as  [they  do]  their  own  bodies.    For  he 

29  that  loveth  his  wife  loveth  himself  (29)  For  no 
one  ever  hated  his  own  body  ;  but  nourisheth  it, 


19 


20 


21 

22 
23 


•  Sy.  uncovereih. 


^Sy. 

Gr.  citfwrt'a. 
-  or,  your  souls. 


f  or,  Saviour. 


358 


EPIIESIANS,    VI. 


Sy.  Ill5 


Sy."Ub 


lords. 


Gr.  the  Devil. 
Sy. 

Gr.  dpxk. 


■  Sy.  shoe,  your 
feet. 

■  Sy.  l^CD 


and   provideth.   for  it,    even  as   the   Messiah  the 
church.     (30)  For  we  are  members  of  his  bod}^,  30 
and  of  his  flesh,  and  of  his  bones.     (31)  For  this  31 
reason,  a  man  should  quit  his  father  and  his  mo- 
ther, and  adhere  to  his  wife ;  and  the  two  should 
be  one  flesh.     (32)  This  is  a  great  mystery  ;ff  but  I  32 
am  speaking  of  the  Messiah,  and  of  his  church. 
(33)  JSTevertheless,  let  each  of  you  severally  so  love  33 
his  wife,  even  as  himself:    and  let  the  wife  rev- 
erence her  husband. — (VI.)  Children,   obey   your  VI. 
parents  in  our  Lord ;    for  this  is  right. ^     (2)  And     2 
the    first   commandment   with   promise,    is    this : 
Honor  thy  father  and  thy  mother  ;  (3)  that  it  may     3 
be  well  Avith  thee,  and  that  thy  life  may  be  pro- 
longed on  the  earth. — (4)    And  parents,  anger  not    4 
your  children  ;  but  train  them  up  in  the  discipline 
and  doctrine  of  our  Lord. — (5)    Servants,  be  obe-     5 
dient  to  your  masters  after  the  flesh,  with  fear,  and 
with  trepidation,  and  with  simplicity  of  heart,  as 
unto  the  Messiah.     (6)  Not  in  the  sight  of  the  eye,     6 
as  if  ye  were  pleasing  men ;  but  as  the  servants  of 
the  Messiah,  who  are  doing  the  will  of  God.     (7)     7 
And  serve  them  with  your  whole  heart,  in  love,  as 
if  serving  our  Lord  and  not  men  ;  (8)  knowing  that     8 
whatever  good  thing  a  man  may  do,  the  same  will 
be  recompensed  to  him  by  our  Lord,  whether  he  be 
a  servant  or  a  free  man. — (9)  Also  ye  masters, ''  do     9 
ye  so  to  your  servants.      Forgive  them  a  fault; 
because  ye  know,  that  ye  have  a  master  in  heaven ; 
and  there  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  him. 

Finally,  my  brethren,  be  strong  in  our  Lord,  and  10 
in  the  energy  of  his  power:    (11)   And  put  ye  on  11 
the  whole  armor  of  God,  so  that  ye  may  be  able  to 
stand  against  the  wiles  of  the  Accuser. <=     (12)  F(;r  12 
our  conflict  is  not  with  flesh  and  blood,  but  with 
principalities, 'I  and  with  those   in   authority,   and 
with  the  possessors  of  this  dark  world,  and  with  the 
evil  spirits  that  are  beneath  heaven.      (13)  There-  13 
fore  put  ye  on  the  whole  armor  of  God,  that  ye  may 
be  able  to  meet  the  evil   [one]  ;  and,  being  in  all 
respects  prepared,  may  stand  firm.     (14)  Stand  up  14 
therefore,  and  gird  your  loins  with  truth  ;  and  put 
on   the   breastplate   of   righteousness;    (15)    and  15 
defend^  your  feet  with  the  preparation  of  the  gos- 
pel of  peace.     (16)  And  herewith  take  to  you  the  16 
confidence^  of  faith,  by  which  yc  will  have  power 


PHILIPPIANS,    I. 


359 


17 


18 


19 


to  quencli  all  the  fiery  darts  of  the  evil  [one].  (17) 
And  put  on  the  helmet  of  rescue  ]S  and  take  hold 
of  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  word  of 
God.  (18)  And  pray  ye,  with  all  prayers  and 
supplications,  in  spirit,  at  all  times :  and  in  prayer 
be  watchful,  at  all  seasons,  praying  constantly,  and 
interceding  for  all  the  saints :  (19)  and  also  for 
me ;  that  language^  may  be  given  me,  in  the 
opening  of  my  mouth ;  so  that  I  may  boldly  pro- 

20  claim  the  mystery  of  the  gospel,  (20)  of  which  I 
am  a  messenger  in  chains ;  that  I  may  utter  it 
boldly,  as  I  ought  to  utter  it. 

And  that  ye  also  may  know  my  affairs,  and  what 
I  am  doing,  lo,  Tj^chicus,  a  beloved  brother,  and  a 
faithful  minister  in  our  Lord,  will  acquaint  you  ; 
(22)  whom  I  have  sent  to  you  for  this  purpose, 
that  ye  might  know  what  is  [going  on]  with  me, 
and  that  your  hearts  may  be  comforted. 

Peace  be  with  the  brethren,  and  love  with  faith, 
from  God  the  Father,  and  from  our  Lord  Jesus  the 

21  Messiah. — (24)  Grace  be  with  all  them  who  love 
our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah  without  corruptness. 
Amen. 

End  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  ;    which  loas  ivritien  from 
Rome,  and  was  sent  by  the  hand  of  Tychicus. 


21 


22 


23 


Sy. 

Gr.  (furripiov. 


^  Sy.  word, 
discourse. 


The  Epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Philippians. 


I.  Paul  and  Timothy,  servants  of  Jesus  the  Mes- 
siah, to  all  the  saints  tlaat  are  in  Jesus  the  Messiah 

2  at  Philippi,  with  the  elders^-  and  deacons.^  (2) 
Grace  be  with  you,  and  peace  from  God  our  Father, 
and  from  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah, 

3  I  thank  my  God  at  the  constant  recollection  of 

4  you,  (4)  in  all  my  prayers  respecting  you;  and 
while  I  rejoice,  I  adore  ;  (5)  on  account  of  your 

5  fellowship  in  the  gospel,  from  the  first  day  until 


Sy."U-il 


.D 


Sy. 


360 


PHILIPPIANS,    I. 


-  Sy.  are  mani- 
fested. 


or,  for  life  to 


now.     (6)  Because  I  am  confident  of  this,  tliat  he     6 
who  hath  begun  the  good  works  in  you,  will  ac- 
complish them  until  the  day  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the 
Messiah.     (7)  For  thus  it  is  right  for  me  to  think     7 
of  you  all,  because   ye  are    permanently  in   my 
heart,  and  because,  both  in  my  bonds  and  in  the 
vindication  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel,  ye  are  my 
associates  in  grace.     (8)  For  God  is  my  witness,     8 
how  I  love  you  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  the  Messiah. 
— (9)  And  this  I  pray  for,  that  your  love  may  still     9 
increase  and  abound,  in   knowledge,  and  in   all 
spiritual  understanding:  (10)  so  that  ye  may  dis-  10 
cern  the  things  that  are  suitable  ;  and  may  be  pure 
and  without  offence,  in  the  day  of  the  Messiah,  (11)  11 
and  be  full  of  the  fruits  of  riohteousness  which  are 
by  Jesus  the  Messiah,  to  the  |)raise  and  glory  of 
God. 

And  I  would  that  ye  might  know,  my  brethren,  12 
that  the  transaction  in  regard  to  me,  hath  eventu- 
ated   rather    for  the   furtherance  of  the   gospel ;  13 
so  that  my  bonds,  on  account  of  the  Messiah,  are 
matter  of  notoriety*^  in  all  the  court,  and  to  all  others. 

(14)  And  man}'-  of  the  brethren  in  our  Lord  have  14 
become  confident,  on  account  of  my  bonds,  and  are 
more  bold  to  speak  the  word  of  God  without  fear. — 

(15)  And  they  herald  [it],  some  from  envy  and  con-  15 
tention ;  but  others  with  good  will,  and  with  love 
for  the  Messiah  ;  (16)  because  they  know  that  I  am  16 
appointed  for  the  vindication  of  the  gospel.     (17)  17 
And  they  who  herald  the  Messiah  in  contention, 

do  it  not  sincerely ;  but  they  hope  to  add  pressure 
to  my  bonds.    (18)  And  in  this  I  have  rejoiced,  and  18 
do  rejoice,  that  in  every  form,  whether  in  pretence 
or  in  truth,  the  Messiah  is  heralded.     (19)  For  I  19 
know,  that  these  things  will  be  found  [conducive] 
to  my  life,'^  through  your  prayers  and  the  gift  of 
the  Spirit  of  Jesus  the  Messiah.     (20)  So  that  I  20 
hope  and  expect,  that  I  shall  in  nothing  be  put  to 
shame ;  but  with  uncovered  face,  as  at  all  times, 
so  now,  the   Messiah   will   be   magnified    in   my 
body,  whether  by  life  or  by  death. — (21)  For  my  21 
life  is,  the  Messiah ;  and  if  I  die,  it  is  gain  to  me. 

(22)  But  if  I  have  fruits  of  my  labors  in  this  life  22 
of  the    flesh,    I    know  not  what    I    shall  choose. 

(23)  For  the  two  press  upon  me :  I  desire  to  be  23 
liberated,  that  I  may  be  with  the  Messiah  ;  and  this 


PHILIPPIANS,    II. 


861 


24  would  be  very  advantageous  to  me.  (2-i)  But  also 
the  business  in  regard  to  you,  urges  upon  me  to 

25  remain  in  the  body. — (25)  And  this  I  conMentlj 
know,  that  I  shall  continue  and  remain,  for  your  joy, 

26  and  for  the  furtherance  of  your  faith;  (26)  so  that 
when  I  come  again  to  you,  your  glorj- ing,  which  is 
in  Jesus  the  Messiah  onl}',  will  abound  through  me. 

27  Let  your  conduct  be  as  becometh  the  gospel  of 
the  Messiah  ;  so  that  if  I  come  I  may  see  you,  and 
if  absent  I  may  hear  of  you,  that  ye  stand  fast  in  one 
spirit  and  in  one  soul,^  and  that  ye  strive  together 

28  in  the  faith  of  the  gospel.  (28)  And  in  nothing  be 
ye  startled,  by  those  who  rise  up  against  us;  [which 
is]  an  indication  of  their  destruction,  and  of  life^ 

29  for  you.  (29)  And  this  is  given  to  you  by  God, 
that  ye  not  only  really  believes  in  the  Messiah,  but 

30  also  that  ye  suffer  on  his  account ;  (30)  and  that  ye 
endure  conflict,  as  ye  have  seen  in  me,  and  now  hear 

II.  concerning  me. — (11.)  If,  therefore,  ye  have  conso- 
lation in  the  Messiah,  or  if  a  commingling^  of  hearts 
in  love,  or  if  a  fellowship  of  the  Spirit,  or  if  com- 

2  passions  and  sympathies ;  (2)  complete  ye  m^'' joy, 
by  having  one  apprehension,  and  one  love,  and  one 

3  soul,  and  one  mind.  (3)  And  do  nothing  in  strife, 
or  in  vain  glory ;  but,  with  lowliness  of  mind,  let 
each  esteem  his  neiafhbor  as  better  than  himself 

4  (4)  And  let  not  each  be  solicitous  [only]  for  him- 

5  self,  but  every  one  also  for  his  neighbor.  (5)  And 
think  ye  so  in  yourselves,  as  Jesus  the  Messiah  also 

6  thought  ;  (6)  who,  as  he  was  in  the  likeness  of  God, 
deemed  it  no  trespass''  to  be  the  coequal<=  of  God ; 

7  (7)  yet  divestedii  himself,  and  assumed  the  likeness 
of  a  servant,  and  was  in  the  likeness  of  men,  and 

8  was  found  in  fashion  as  a  man  ;  (8)  and  he  humbled 
himself,  and  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the 

9  death  of  the  cross.  (9)  Wherefore,  also,  God  hath 
highly  exalted  him,  and  given  him  a  name  which 

10  is  more  excellent  than  all  names ;  (10)  that  at  the 
name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow,  of  [beings] 

11  in  heaven,  and  on  earth,  and  under  the  earth  ;  (11) 
and  that  every  tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus  the 
Messiah  is  the  Lord,^  to   the  glory  of  God   his 

12  Father. — (12)  Therefore,  my  beloved,  as  ye  have 
at  all  times  obeyed,  not  only  when  I  was  near  to 
you,  but  now  when  I  am  far  from  you,  prosecute 
the  work  of  your  life,^  more  abundantly,?  with  fear 


«  Sy  .  ^  CM 


*'  or,  sahation. 

s  Sy.  believing 
ye  believe. 


Sy.  converse 
willi  the  heart. 


or,  robbery. 
Sy.  "jkLKK.^ 
or,  emptied. 


Sy.  "UjId 


f  or,  salvation. 

^  Sy.  A^'jj_.Au 


862 


PHILIPPIANS,    III. 


or,  pure. 


or,  salvation. 


1  Sy. 


and  with  trembling.     (13)  For  God  is  operating  in  13 
you,  both  to  purpose,   and  also  to   perform  that 
which  ye  desire.     (14)  Do  all  things  without  mur-  14 
muring,  and  without  altercation ;  (15)  that  ye  may  be  15 
perfect  and  without  blemish,  as  the  sincere'^  children 
of  God,  who  are  resident  in  a  perverse  and  crooked 
generation ;  and  that  ye  may  appear  among  them 
as  luminaries  in  the  world;  (16)  so  that  ye  may  be  16 
to  them  in  place  of  life ;'  for  my  glory  in  the  day 
of  the  Messiah,  that  I  may  not  have  run  in  vain, 
or  toiled  for  naught. — (17)  And  if  I  should  be  17 
made  a  libation  upon  the  sacrifice  and  service  of 
your  faith,  I  rejoice  and  exult  with  you  all.     (18)  18 
And  so  also  do  ye  rejoice  and  exult  with  me. 

But  I   hope   in   our  Lord  Jesus,  that    I  shall  19 
shortly  send  Timothy  unto  you,  so  that  I  also  may 
have  composure,  when  informed  concerning  you. 
(20)  For  I  have  no  other  one  here,  who,  like  my-  20 
self,  will  sincerely  care  for  your  welfare.     (21)  For  21 
they  all  seek  their  own,  not  the  [things]  of  Jesus 
the  Messiah.     (22)  But  ye  know  the  proof  of  him,  22 
that  as  a  son  with  his  father,  so  he  labored  with  me 
in  the  gospel.     (23)  Him  I  hope  shortly  to  send  to  23 
you,  when  I  shall  have  seen  how  '[things  result] 
with  me.     (24)  And  I  trust  in  my  Lord,  that  I  24 
shall  shortly  come  myself  to  you. — (25)  But  now,  25 
a  circumstance  urged  me  to  send  to  you  Epaphro- 
ditus,  the  brother  who  is  an  assistant  and  laborer 
with  me,  but  is  your  legate"^  and  minister^  to  my 
wants.     (26)  For  he  longed  to  see  you  all,  and  was  26 
anxious,  because  he  knew  ye  had  heard,  that  he 
was  sick.     (27)  And  indeed  he  was  sick,  nigh  unto  27 
death :  but  God  had  mercy  on  him :  nor  was  it  on 
him  only,  but  also  on  me,  that  I  might  not  have 
trouble  upon  trouble.      (28)   Promptly,  therefore,  28 
have  I  sent  him  to  you ;  so  that  when  ye  see  him, 
ye  may  again  be  joyful,  and  I  may  have  a  little 
breathing.     (29)  Eeceive  him   then  in  the  Lord,  29 
with  all  joy ;    and  hold  in  honor  those  who  are 
such.     (30)  For,  because  of  the  Messiah's  work,  he  80 
came  near  to  death,  and  little  regarded  his  life,  that 
he  might  fulfill  what  you  lacked  in  the  ministration 
to  me. 

Finally,  my  brethren,  rejoice  in  our  Lord.     To  IIL 
write  these  [things]  again  and  again  to  you,  is  not 


PHILIPPIANS,    III. 


863 


irksome  to  me,  because  tliej  make  you  cautious. 

2  (2)  Beware  of  dogs  ;  beware  of  evil  doers ;  beware 

3  of  tlie  clipped  in  flesh.  (3)  For  we  are  the  [real] 
circumcision,  who  worship  God  in  spirit,  and  glory 
in  Jesus  t^e  Messiah,  and  place  no  reliance  on  the 

4  flesh.  (4)  And  yet  I  might  place  reliance  on  the 
flesh.  For,  if  any  one  thinketh  that  his  reliance 
should  be  on  the  flesh,  I  might  [do  so]  more  than 

5  he.  (5)  Circumcised  when  eight  days  old ;  of  the 
stock  of  Israel ;  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin ;  a  He- 
brew, descendant  of  Hebrews ;    as  to  the   law,   a 

6  Pharisee ;  (6)  as  to  zeal,  a  persecutor  of  the  church  ; 
and  as  to  the  righteousness=i  of  the  law,  I  was  with- 

7  out  fault.  (7)  But  these  things,  which  had  been 
my  excellence,  I  have  accounted  a  detriment,  be- 

8  cause  of  the  Messiah.  (8)  And  now  also  I  account 
them  all  a  detriment,  because  of  the  excellency  of 
the  knowledge  of  Jesus  the  Messiah  my  Lord  ;  for 
the  sake  of  whom,  I  have  parted  with  all  things, 
and  have  accounted  [them]  as  dung,  that  I  might 

9  gain  the  Messiah,  (9)  and  be  found  in  him ;  since 
my  righteousness  is  not  [now]  that  from  the  law, 
but  that  which  is  from  faith  in  the  Messiah,  that  is, 

10  the  righteousness^  which  is  from  God;  (10)  that 
thereby  I  might  know  Jesus,  and  the  efl&cacyc  of 
his  resurrection ;  and  might  participate  in  his  suf- 

11  ferings,  and  be  assimilated  to  his  death:  (11)  if  so 
be,  I  may  attain  to  the  resurrection  from  the  dead. 

12  (12)  Not  as  though  I  had  already  taken  [the  prize], 
or  were  already  complete  ;  but  I  run  [in  the  race], 
if  so  I  may  take  that,  for  which  Jesus  the  Messiah 

13  took  me.  (13)  My  brethren,  I  do  not  consider 
myself,  as  having  taken  [it].  But  one  thing  I 
know,  that  I  forget  the  things  behind  me,  and  reach 

1-1  for  the  things  before  me ;  (11)  and  I  run  straight 
for  the  goa],<^  that  I  may  obtain  the  [prize]  of  vic- 
tory of  the  call  of  God  from  on  high,  by  Jesus  the 

15  Me"ssiah.  (15)  Therefore  let  those  who  are  perfect, 
have  these  views ;  and  if  ye  differently  view  any 

16  thing,  God  will  reveal  that  also  to  you.  (16)  Never- 
theless, that  we  may  attain  to  this,  let  us  proceed  on 

17  in  one  path,  and  with  one  consent. — (17)  Be  like  me, 
my  brethren ;    and   contemplate  them,  who   walk 

18  afler  the  pattern  ye  have  seen  in  us.  (18)  For  there 
are  many  who  walk  otherwise;  of  whom  I  have 
often  told  you,  and  I  now  tell  you,  with  weeping, 


Sy.  ]Zon  ol 


'Sy.  "jZcLQjiJl 
Sy.  \}.t->^ 


^  or,  standard. 


364 


PHILIPPIANS,    IV. 


or,  Saviour. 


or,  mildness, 
sweetness  of 
disposition. 


^  or,  trained, 
disciplined. 


that  they  are  adversaries  of  the  cross  of  the  Messiah ; 
(19)  whose  end  is  destruction ;  whose  god  is  their  19 
belly,  and  their  glory  their  shame  ;  whose  thoughts 
are  on  things  of  the  earth.     (20)  But  our  concern  is  20 
with  heaven  ;  and  from  thence  we  expect  our  Vivi- 
fier,e  our  Lord,  Jesus  the  Messiah;  (21)  who  will  21 
change  the  body  of  our  abasement,  that  it  may  have 
the  likeness  of  the  body  of  his  glory,  according  to 
his  great  power,  whereby  all  things  are  made  sub- 
ject to  him. — (IV.)  Wherefore,  my  beloved  and  IV. 
dear  brethren,  my  joy  and  my  crown  ! — so  stand 
ye  fast  in  our  Lord,  my  beloved! 

I  beseech  of  Euodias  and  Syntyche,  that  they  be     2 
of  one  mind  in  our  Lord.     (3)  I  also  beseech  of     3 
thee,  my  true  yokefellow,  that   thou   assist  those 
women  who  toiled  with  rae  in  the  gospel ;  together 
with  Clement,  and  with   the   rest   of  my  helpers, 
whose  names  are  written  in  the  book  of  life. — (4)     4 
Rejoice  ye  in  our  Lord,  at  all  times ;  and  again  I 
say,  Rejoice.     (5)  Let  your  humility^  be  recognized     5 
among    all    men.      Our   Lord    is    near.      (6)  Be     6 
anxious  for  nothing;  but  at  all  times,  by  prayer 
and  supplication  with  thanksgiving,  make  known 
your  requests  before  God.     (7)  And  the  peace  of     7 
God,  which  surpasseth  all  knowledge,  will  keep 
your   hearts  and   your  minds,  through  Jesus  the 
Messiah. — (8)    Finally,  my  brethren,  what  things     8 
are  true,  and  what  things  are  decorous,  and  what 
things  are  right,  and  what   things  are   pure,  and 
what  things  are  lovely,  and  what  things  are  com- 
mendable, and  deeds  of  praise  and  approbation, — 
on  these  be  your  thoughts.     (9)  What  things  ye     9 
have  learned,  and  received,  and  heard,  and  seen,  in 
me, — these  do  ye :  and  the  God  of  peace  will  be 
with  you. 

And  I  rejoice  greatly  in  our  Lord,  that  ye  have  10 
[again]  commenced  caring  for  me  ;  even  as  ye  had 
before  cared  [for  me,]  but  ye  had  not  the  opportu- 
nity.    (11)  Yet  I  say  this,  not  because  I  was  in  11 
want ;    for  I  have  learned  to  make  that  satisf)"-  me, 
which  I  have.     (12)  I  know  how  to  be  depressed,  12 
and  I  also  know  how  tp  abound  in  every  thing  ; 
and  in  all  things  am  I  exercised,"^  both  in  fullness 
and  in  famine,  in  abundance  and  in  penury.     (13)  13 
I  find  strength  for  every  thing,  in  the  Messiah  who 
strengtheneth  me.     (14)  Yet  ye  have  done  well,  in  14 


COLOSSIANS,    I. 


365 


15  tliat  ye  communicated   to   my   necessities." — (15) 
■   And  je  know  also,  Philippians,  that  in  the  begin- 
ning of  the  annunciation,  when  I  left  Macedonia, 
not  one  of  the  churches  communicated  with  me  in 
respect  to  receiving  and  giving,  except  ye  only; 

16  (16)  that  also  at  Thessalonica,  once  and  again  ye 

17  sent  me  relief     (17)  Not  that  I  desire  a  gift ;  but 

18  I  wish  fruits  may  multiply  unto  you.  (18)  I  have 
[now]  received  all,  and  I  abound,  and  am  full : 
and  I  accepted  all  that  ye  sent  to  me  by  EpajDhro- 
ditus,  a  sweet  odor,  and  an  acceptable  sacrifice  that 

19  pleaseth  God. — (19)  And  may  God  supply  all  your 
necessity,^  according  to  his  riches,  in  the  glory  of 

20  Jesus  the  Messiah.  (20)  And  to  God  our  Father, 
be  glory  and  honor,  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 

21  Salute  all  the  saints  who  are  in  Jesus  the  Messiah. 

22  The  brethren  Avho  are  with  me,  salute  you.  (22) 
All  the  saints  salute  you,  especially  those  of  Caesar's 

23  household. — (23)  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the 
Messiah,  be  with  you  all.     Amen. 

End  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians ;  ichich  2oas  written 
from  Rome,  and  sent  by  the  hand  of  Epaphroditus. 


Sy.  oJL^ol 


^  or,  7cant, 
indigence. 


The  Epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Colossians. 


I.      Paul,  a  legate  of  Jesus  the  Messiah  by  the  plea- 

2  sure  of  God,  and  Timothy  a  brother,  (2)  to  them 
who  are  at  Colosse,  the  brethren,  holy  and  believ- 
ing in  Jesus  the  Messiah :  peace  be  with  you,  and 
grace  from  God  our  Father. 

3  We  give  thanks  to  God,  the  Father  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  the  Messiah,  at  all  times,  and  pray  for  you  ; 

4  (1)  lo,  ever  since  w^e  heard  of  your  faith  in  Jesus 
the  Messiah,  and  of  your  love  to  all  the  saints ; 

5  (5)  because  of  the  hope  that  is  laid  up  for  you  in 
heaven,  of  which  ye  heard  before  in  the  word  of 

6  truth  of  the  gospel ;    (6)  which  is  announced  to 


366 


COLOSSIANS,    I. 


»  Sy.  1V)\S 


^  or,  supplicate. 


-=  Sy.  »D5l 


^  Sy.  Ij^jOSJ 

« Sy.  IZakjj 


<"  or,  slandelh,  is 
cslablished. 

E  Sy.  ^ilD^ 


10 


11 


jou,  as  also  to  all  the  world  j^^  and  which  groweth 
and  yieldeth  fruits,  as  it  doth  also  among  you  from 
the  day  ye  heard  and  knew  the  grace  of  God  in 
reality :  (7)  as  ye  learned  from  Epaphras,  our  be- 
loved fellow-servant,    who   is   for  you  a  faithful 
minister  of  the  Messiah  ;  (8)  and  who  hath  made 
known  to  us  your  love  in  the  Spirit. — (9)  There- 
fore we  also,  from  the  day  we  heard  [of  it],  have 
not  ceased  to  pray  for  you  ;  and  to  ask''  that  ye 
may  be  filled  with  a  knowledge  of  the  good  pleas- 
ure of  God,  in  all  wisdom,   and  in  all  spiritual 
understanding ;  (10)  that  ye  may  walk  as  is  right, "= 
and  may  please  God  with  all  good  works,  and  may 
yield  fruits,  and  grow  in  the  knowledge  of  God ; 
(11)  and  may  be  strengthened  with  all  strength, 
according   to   the    greatness    of  his   glory,  in  all 
patience  and  long  suffering;  (12)    and  maj^,  with  12 
joy,  give   thanks  to  God   the   Father,  who  hath 
fitted  us  for  a  portion  of  the  inheritance  of  the 
saints  in  light ;  (13)  and  hath  rescued  us  from  the  13 
dominion  of  darkness,  and  transferred  us  to  the 
kingdom  of  his  beloved  Son ;  (14)  by  whom  we  14 
have    redemption'^    and  remission   of  sins : — (15)  15 
who  is  the  likeness^  of  the  invisible  God,  and  the 
first-born  of  all  creatures:    (16)   and  by  him  was  16 
created  every  thing  that  is  in  heaven  and  on  earth, 
all  that  is  seen  and  all  that  is  unseen,  whether 
thrones,  or   dominions,  or  principalities,   or  sov- 
ereignties;   every  thing   was    through    him,  and 
was   created  by   him :     (17)    and    he    was   prior 
to    all,  and    by    him    every    thing   exists.^    (18) 
And  he  is  the  head  of  the  body  the  church ;    as 
he  is   the   head  and   first-born   from   among  the 
dead,  that  he  might  be  the  firsts  in  all  things. — 
(19)  For  it  pleased  [the  Father],  that  in  him  all  19 
fullness  should  dwell ;  (20)  and  by  him,  to  reconcile  20 
all  things  to  himself;  and  through  him,  he  hath 
pacified,  with  the  blood  of  his  cross,  both  [those] 
on  earth  and  those  in  heaven.     (21)  And  also  to 
you,  who  were  before   alienated   and  enemies   in 
your  minds,  because  of  your  evil  deeds, — (22)  to 
you,  he  hath  now  given  peace,  by  the  body  of  his 
flesh,  and  by  his  death ;  that  he  might  establish 
you  in  his  presence,  holy,  without  blemish,  and 
without  offence ;  (23)  provided  3'e  continue  in  your  23 
faith,  your  foundation  being  firm,  and  je  be  not 


17 

18 


21 


22 


COLOSSIANS,     II. 


367 


removed  from  the  hope  of  the  gospel ;  of  which 
ye  have  heard,  that  it  is  proclaimed  in  all  the 
creation'!  beneath  heaven ;  of  which  [gospel]  I 
Paul  am  a  minister. 

24  And  I  rejoice  in  the  sufferings  which  are  for 
your  sakes;  and,  in  my  flesh,  I  fill  up  the  defi- 
ciency in  the  afflictions  of  the  Messiah,  in  behalf  of 

25  his  body,  which  is  the  church ;  (25)  of  which  I  am 
a  minister,  according  to  the  dispensation  of  God 
which  is  given  to  me  among  you,  that  I  should 

26  fulfill  the  word  of  God,  (26)  [namely,]  that  mystery, 
which  was  hidden  for  ages  and  generations,  but  is 

27  now  revealed  to  his  saints;  (27)  to  whom  God 
would  make  known  what  is  the  riches  of  the  glory 
of  this  mystery  among  the  Gentiles ;  which  [mys- 
tery] is  the  Messiah ;  who  in  you  is  the  hope  of 

28  our  glory ;  (28)  whom  we  proclaim,  and  teach  and 
make  known  to  every  man,  in  all  wisdom;  that  we 
may  present  every  man  perfect  in  Jesus  the  Mes- 

29  siah.  (29)  And  for  this  also,  I  toil  and  strive,  with 
the  aid  of  the  strength  that  is  imparted  to  me. 


Sy 


II.  And  I  wish  you  to  know,  what  a  struggle*  I  have 
for  you,  and  for  them  of  Laodicea,  and  for  the 
others  who  have  not  seen  my  face  in  the  flesh: 

2  (2)  that  their  hearts  may  be  comforted,  and  that 
they,  by  love,  may  come  to  all  the  riches  of  assu- 
rance, and  to  the  understanding  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  mystery  of  God  the  Father,  and  of  the  Mes- 

3  siah,  (8)  in  whom  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wis- 

4  dom  and  of  knowledge.  (-4)  And  this  I  say,  lest 
any  one  should  mislead  3"0U  by  the  persuasiveness 

5  of  words.  (5)  For  though  I  am  separated  from 
you  in  the  flesh,  yet  I  am  with  j^ou  in  spirit ;  and 
I  rejoice  at  beholding  your  good  order,  and  the 

6  stability  of  your  faith  in  the  Messiah. — (6)  As 
therefore  ye  have  received  Jesus  the  Messiah  our 

7  Lord,  walk   ye   in    him,    (7)  strengthening   your 
roots  and  building  up  yourselves  in  him,  and  es- 
tablishing yourselves  in  the  faith  which  ye  have  |Za^aico\«g^ 
learned,  in  which  may  ye  abound  in   thanksgiv- 

8  ing.  (8)  Beware,  lest  any  man  make  you  naked, 
by  philosophy, b  and  by  vain  deception,  according 
to  the  doctrines  of  men,  according  to  the  rudi- 
ments^   of  the  world,    and  not  according   to  the 

9  Messiah,  (9)  in  whom  dwellcth   all   the  fullness*' 


''  Sy.  m\'-)0 


Gr.  aywva. 


Sy. 


Gr.  goi^tfa. 
•^  Sy.  'jAn^.n 


368 


COLOSSIANS,    III. 


« Sy.  Uocnl] 


or,  hody. 


f  Sy.  ^jOyJ 

*■  Sy.  1£u» 
'  or,  substance. 


^  See  xerse  8. 


10 


11 


of  the  Divinitye  corporeally.  (10)  And  in  him 
ye  are  also  complete,  because  he  is  the  head  of 
all  principalities  and  authorities.  (11)  And  in 
him  ye  have  been  circumcised  with  a  circumcision 
without  hands,  by  casting  oif  the  flesh^  of  sins,  by 
a  circumcision  of  the  Messiah.  (12)  And  ye  have  12 
been  buried  with  him,  by  baptism ;  and  by  it  ye 
have  risen  with  him ;  while  ye  believed  in  the 
power   of  God,  who   raised  him   from  the  dead. 

(13)  And  you,  who  were  dead  in  3'-our  sins,  and  by  13 
the  uncircumcision  of  your  flesh,  he  hath  vivified 
with  him;  and  he  hath  forgiven  us  all  our  sins: 

(14)  and,  by  his  mandates,  he  blotted  out  the  hand-  14 
writing  of  our  debts,  which  [handwriting]  existed 
against  us,  and  took  [it]  from  the  midst,  and  afl&xed 
[it]  to  his  cross.  (15)  And,  by  yielding  up  his 
body,  he  showed  contempt  for  principalities  and 
authorities ;  and  put  them  to  shame,  openly,  in  his 
own  person. — (16)  Let  no  one  therefore  disquiets 
you  about  food  and  drink,  or  about  the  distinctions 

of  festivals,  and  new  moons,  and  sabbaths  ;h  (17)  17 
which  were  shadows  of  the  things  then   future ; 
but  the  bodyi  is  the  Messiah.     (18)  And  let  no 
one  wish,  by  abasing  the  mind,  to  bring  you  under 
bonds,  that  ye  subject  yourselves  to  the  worship 
of  angels ;    while  he  is  prying  into  that  which  he 
hath  not  seen,  and  is  vainly  inflated  in  his  fleshly 
mind,  (19)  and  holdeth  not  the  head,  from  which 
the  whole  body  is  framed  and   constructed,  with 
joints  and  members,  and  groweth  with  the  growth 
[given]  of  God. — (20)  For  if  ye  are  dead  with  the  20 
Messiah  from  the  rudiments'^  of  the  world,  why  are 
ye  judged  as  if  ye  Avere  living  in  the  world?     (21)  21 
But,  touch  thou  not,  and  taste  thou  not,  and  han- 
dle thou  not:  (22)  for  these  things  perish  in  the 
using;  and  they  are  the  commandments  and  doc- 
trines of  men.     (23)  And  they  seem  to  have  a  kind 
of  wisdom,  in  a  show  of  humility,  and  of  the  fear 
of  God,  and  of  not  sparing  the  body ;  not  in  any 
thing  of  excellence,  but  in  things  subservient  to  the 
body. — (III.)  If  then  ye  have  risen  with  the  Mes-III. 
siali,  seek  the  things  on  high,  where  tlie  Messiah 
sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  God.     (2)  Think  of     2 
things  on  high  ;  not  of  the  things  on  earth  :  (3)  for     3 
3'e  are  dead  ;  and  your  life  is  hidden  with  the  Mes- 
siah, in  God.     (4)  And  when  the  Messiah,  who  is 


15 


16 


18 


19 


22 


23 


4 


our  life, 'I  shall  be  manifested,  then  shall  ye  also  be 
manifested  with  him  in  glory. 

5  Mortify  therefore  your  members  that  are  on  the 
earth;  wiioredom,  impurity,  and  the  passions,  and 
evil  concupiscence,  and  avarice  which  is  idolatry. 

6  (6)  For  on  account  of  these  [things],  the  wrath  of 

7  Grod  cometh  on  the  children  of  disobedience.  (7) 
And  in  these  [things]   ye  also   formerly  walked, 

8  when  ye  lived  in  them.  (8)  But  now,  piit  away 
from  you  all  these,  wrath,  anger,  malice,  reviling, 

9  filthy  talking:  (9)  and  lie  not  one  to  another;  but 

10  put  off  the  old  man,  with  all  his  practices;  (10)  and 
put  ye  on  the  new  [man],  that  is  renewed  in  knowl- 

11  edge,  after  tlie  likeness  of  his  Creator  ;  (11)  where'' 
there  is  neither  Jew  nor  Gentile,  ^  neither  circum- 
cision nor  uncircumcision,  neither  Greek  nor  bar- 
barian, neither  bond  nor  free;  but  the  Messiah  is 

12  all,  and  in  all. — (12)  Therefore,  holy  and  beloved, 
as  the  elect  of  God,  put  ye  on  compassions,  and  ten- 
derness, and  suavity,  and  humbleness  of  mind,  and 

13  gentleness,  and  long  suffering.  (13)  And  be  ye  in- 
dulgent towards  one  another,  and  forgiving  to  one 
another:  and  if  any  one  has  a  complaint  against 
his  neighbor,  as  the  Messiah  forgave  you,  so  also 

14  do  ye  forgive.     (14)  And  wnth   all   these,    [join] 

15  love,  which  is  the  girdle^  of  perfection,  (15)  And 
let  the  peace  of  the  Messiah  direct^  your  hearts ; 
for  to  that  ye  have  been  called,  in  one  body ;  and 

16  be  ye  thankful  to  the  Messiah. — (16)  And  let  his 
word  dwell  in  you  richly,  in  all  wisdom.  And 
teach  and  admonish  yourselves,  by  psalms  and 
hymns  and  spiritual  songs,  and  with  grace  in  your 

17  hearts  sing  ye  unto  God.  (17)  And  whatever  ye 
do  in  word  or  act,  do  it  in  the  name  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  the  Messiah,  and  give  thanksgiving  through 
him  to  God  the  Father. 

18  Wives,  be  ye  subject  to  your  husbands,  as  is  right 

19  in  the  Messiah,     (19)  Husbands,  love  ye  your  wives, 

20  and  be  not  bitter  towards  them. — (20)  Children, 
obey  your  parents  in  every  thing  ;  for  this  is  pleas- 

21  iug  before  our  Lord.     (21)  Parents,  anger  not  your 

22  children,  lest  they  be  discouraged. — (22)  Servants, 
obey  in  all  things  your  bodily  masters  ;*"  not  in  the 
sight  of  the  eye  only,  as  those  who  please  men,  but 
with  a  simple  heart,  and  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord. 

23  (23)  And  whatever  ye  do,  do  it  with  your  whole 


or,  source  of 
life. 


^  i.  e.  in  which 
new  man. 

Aramaean. 


Sy.  "ir^U* 


®  or,  lead, 
govern. 


or,  lord&. 


370 


COLOSSIANS,    IV. 


Sy.  UQJ]^ 
a  lord. 


"  or,  whom. 


^  See  Num. 
xxxvi.  11. 

«  Sy.  ViCLJi_j 


soul,  as  unto  our  Lord,  and  not  as  to  men  :  (24)  and  24 
know  ye,  that  from  our  Lord  ye  will  receive  a 
recompense  as  the  inheritance;    for  ye  serve  the 
Lord  the  Messiah,     (25)  But  the  delinquent  will  25 
receive  a  recompense,  according  to  the  delinquency ; 
and  there  is  no  respect  of  persons. 

Masters,  do  equity  and  justice^  to  your  servants;  IV. 
and  be  conscious  that  jq  also  have  a  master''  in 
heaven. 

Persevere  in  prayer ;  and  be  watchful  in  it,  and     2 
in  giving  thanks,     (3)  And  pray  also  for  us,  that     3 
God  would  open  to  us  a  door  of  speech,  for  uttering 
the  mystery  of  the  Messiah,  for  the  sake  of  which^ 
I  am  in  bonds  ;  (4)  that  I  may  unfold  it,  and  utter    4 
it,  as  it  behooveth  me, — (5)  Walk  in  wisdom  to-     5 
wards  them  without :  and  I'edeem  your  opportunity. 
(6)  And  let  your  speech  at  all  times  be  with  grace,     G 
as  it  were,  seasoned  with  salt :  and  know  ye,  how 
ye  ought  to  give  answer  to  every  man. 

And  what  is  [occurrent]  with  me,  will  Tychicus     7 
make  known  to  you ;  who  is  a  beloved  brother,  and 
a  faithful  minister,  and  our  fellow-servant  in  the 
Lord  :    (8)  whom  I  have  sent  to  you  for  this  pur-     8 
pose,  that  he  might  know  your  affairs,  and  might 
comfort  your  hearts  ;  (9)  together  with  Onesimus,     9 
a  faithful  and  beloved  brother,  who  is  from  among 
Tliesc  will  make  known  to  you  what  is  [oc- 


you. 


10 


11 


current]  with  us, — (10)  Aristarchus,  my  fellow-cap 
tive,  saluteth  you ;  also  Marcus,  an  uncle's  son'^  to 
Barnabas,  of  whom  ye  have  received  directions, 
that  if  he  come  to  you,  ye  may  kindly  receive  him  : 
(11)  also  JesuSjC  who  is  called  Justus,  These  are  of 
the  circumcision,  and  they  only  have  aided  me  in 
the  kingdom  of  God  ;  and  they  have  been  a  comfort 
to  me,  (12)  Epapliras  saluteth  you,  who  is  from  12 
among  j-ou,  a  servant  of  the  Messiah,  alwaj's 
laboring  for  you  in  prayer,  that  ye  may  stand  per- 
fect and  complete  in  all  the  good  pleasure  of  God. 
(13)  For  I  testify  for  him,  that  he  hath  great  zeal 
for  you,  and  for  them  of  Laodicea,  and  for  them  of 
Ilierapolis.  (14)  Luke  the  physician,  our  beloved, 
saluteth  you;  also  Demas,  (15)  Salute  ye  the 
brethren  in  Laodicea,  andNymplias,  and  the  church 
in  his  house,  (16)  And  when  this  e])istle  shall  have  16 
been  read  among  you,  cause  it  to  be  read  also  in  the 


13 

14 
15 


1    THESSALONIANS,    I. 


871 


churcli  of  the  Laodiceans  ;  and  that  whicli  is  writ- 

17  ten  from  Laodicca,  do  ye  read.  (17)  And  say  to 
Arcliippus:  Be  attentive  to  tlie  ministry  which 
thou  hast  received  in  our  Lord,  that  thou  fulfill 

18  it. — (18)  This  salutation  is  by  the  hand  of  me 
Paul.  Eemember  my  bonds.  Grace  be  with  you. 
Amen. 


Ei2d  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians  ;  which  was  written  from 
Rome,  and  was  sent  by  the  hands  of  Tychicus. 


The  First  Epistle  of  Paul  to  tlie  Tliessalonians. 


I  Paul  and  Sylvanus  and  Timothy,  to  the  church 
of  the  Tliessalonians,  which  is  in  God  the  Father 
and  in  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah  :  Grace  be  with 
you,  and  peace. 

2  We  give  thanhs  to  God  at'all  times,  on  account 
of  you  all,  and  remember  you  continually  in  our 

3  prayers :  (3)  and  we  call  to  mind  before  God  the 
Father  the  works  of  your  faith,  and  the  toil  of  your 
love,  and  the  patience  of  your  hope  in  our  Lord 

4  Jesus  the  Messiah.     (4)  For  we  know  your  election,  ^ 

5  my  brethren,  beloved  of  God.  (5)  For  our  preach- 
ing among  you,  was  not  in  words  only ;  but  also  in 
power,  and  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  in  genuine  per- 
suasion.    Ye  also  know,  how  we  were  among  you 

6  for  your  sakes.  (6)  And  ye  became  imitators  of 
us,  and  of  our  Lord,  in  that  }" e  received  the  word 
in  great  affliction,  and  with  the  joy  of  the  Holy 

7  Spirit.  (7)  And  ye  were  a  pattern  for  all  the 
believers  who  are  in  Macedonia  and  in  Achaia. 

8  (8)  For  from  you  the  word  of  our  Lord  sounded^ 
forth ;  [and]  not  only  in  Macedonia  and  Achaia, 
but  in  every  place,  your  faith  in  God  is  heard  of; 
so  that  we  have  no  need  to  say  any  thing  concern- 

9  ing  you.  (9)  For  they  declare,  what  an  ingress 
wo  had  to  you,  and  how  ye  turned  from  the  wor- 


^Za.*.Ci^ 


''  Sy.  was  heard. 


872 


1    THESSALONIANS,    II. 


Sy. 


«  Sy.  conversed 
loilh. 


ship  of  idols  unto  God,  that  ye  might  worship  the 
living  and  true  God;  (10)  while  ye  wait  for  his  Son  10 
from  heaven,  that  Jesus  whom  he  raised  from  the 
dead,  who  delivereth  us  from  the  wrath  to  come. 

And  ye  yourselves,  my  brethren,  know  our  II. 
entrance  among  you,  that  it  was  not  in  vain :  (2)  2 
but  we  first  suffered  and  were  treated  with  indignity, 
as  ye  know,  at  Philippi ;  and  then,  in  a  great  agony, 
with  confidence  in  our  God,*  we  addressed  to  you 
the  gospel  of  the  Messiah.  (3)  For  our  exhortation  3 
proceeded  not  from  deceit,  nor  from  impurity,  nor  in 
guile :  (-l)  but  as  we  had  been  approved  of  God  to 
be  intrusted  with  the  gospel,  so  we  speak,  not  as 
pleasing  men,  but  God  who  searchcth  our  hearts. 
(5)  For  at  no  time  have  we  used  flattering  speech, 
as  ye  know ;  nor  a  cloak  of  capidity,  God  is  wit- 
ness. (6)  Neither  have  we  sought  glory  from 
men,  either  from  you  or  from  others,  when  we 
might  have  been  chargeable  as  legates  of  the 
Messiah.  (7)  But  we  were  lowly  among  you;  and 
like  a  nurse,  who  fondleth''  her  children,  (8)  so  we 
also  fondled  [you],  and  were  desirous  to  impart  to 
you,  not  the  gospel  of  God  merely,  but  also  our  own 
soul,  because  ye  wer{^  dear  to  us.  (9)  For  ye  recol- 
lect, brethren,  that  we  labored  and  toiled,  working 
with  our  own  hands,  by  night  and  by  day,  that  we 
might  not  be  chargeable  to  any  one  of  you.  (10)  Ye 
are  witnesses,  and  God  [also],  how  we  preached  to 
you  the  gospel  of  God,  purely,  and  uprightly,  and 
were  blameless  towards  all  them  that  believe : 
(11)  as  yourselves  know,  we  entreated  each  one  of  11 
you,  as  a  father  his  children,  and  comforted^  your 
hearts:  (12)  and  we  charged  you,  to  walk  as  it  12 
becometh  God,  who  hath  called  you  to  his  kingdom 
and  his  glory. — (13)  Therefore  also  we  give  thanks 
unceasingly  to  God,  that  the  word  of  God  Avhich  ye 
received  from  us,  ye  did  not  receive  as  the  word  of 
men,  but  as  being  truly  the  word  of  God,  which 
worketh  efficiently  in  you  and  in  them  that  believe. 
(14)  For  ye,  my  brethren,  became  assimilated  to  the  1-4 
churches  of  God  in  Judi\3a,  the  persons  who  are  in 
Jesus  the  Messiah ;  in  that  ye  so  suffered,  even  ye 
from  your  own  countrymen,  as  also  they  from  the 
I  Jews,  (15)  the  persons  who  slew  our  Loixl  Jesus  the  15 
[Messiah,  and  persecuted  their  own  prophets  and  us ; 


4 


6 


9 


10 


13 


1   THESSALONIANS,    III. 


373 


and  they  please  not  God,  and  are  made  hostile  to  all 

16  men;  (16)  and  they  forbid  us  to  speak  to  the  Gen- 
tiles, that  they  may  have  life  ]^ — to  fill  up  their 
sins  at  all  times.  And  wrath  cometh  on  them  to 
the  uttermost. 

17  But  we,  my  brethren,  have  been  bereaved  of  you 
for  a  short  time,  (in  visible  presence,^  not  in 
our  hearts,)  and  have  the  more  exerted  ourselves, 

18  to  behold  your  faces,  with  great  affection.  (18) 
And  we  purposed  to  come  to  you, — I  Paul,  once 

19  and  again  ;  but  Satan  hindered  me.  (19)  For  what 
is  our  hope,  and  our  joy,  and  the  crown  of  ourglo' 
rying;  unless  it  be  ye,  before  our  Lord  Jesus  at 

20  his  coming?     (20)  For  ye  are  our  glory,  and  our 
Ill.joy. — (III.)  And,  because  we  could  no  longer  en- 
dure it,  we  were  willing  to  be  left  alone  at  Athens, 

2  (2)  and  to  send  to  you  Timothy  our  brother,  a 
servant^  of  God,  and  our  assistant  in  the  announce- 
ment of  the  Messiah;    that   he  mio'ht  strens-then 

3  you,  and  inquire  of  you  respecting  your  faith  :  (3) 
lest  any  of  you  should  be  disheartened''  by  these 
afflictions;    for  ye   know,   that  we  are  appointed 

4  thereto,  (l)  For  also  when  we  were  with  you,  we 
forewarned  j^ou,  that  we  were  to  be  afflicted;  as 

5  ye  know  did  occur.  (5)  Therefore  also  I  could 
not  be  quiet,  until  I  sent  to  learn  your  faith;  lest 
the  Tempter  should  have  tempted  you,  and  our 

6  labor  have  been  in  vain.— (6)  But  now,  since 
Timothy  hath  come  to  us  from  among  you,  and 
hath  informed  us  respecting  your  faith  and  your 
love,  and  that  ye  have  a  good  remembrance  of  us 
at  all  times,  and  that  ye  desire  to  see  us,  even  as 

7  we  [to  see]  you ;  (7)  therefore  we  are  comforted  in 
you,  ,my  brethren,  amid  all  our  straits  and  afflic- 

8  tions,    on  account  of  your  faith.     (8)  And   now, 

9  we  live,'=  if  ye  stand  fast  in  our  Lord.  (9)  For 
what  thanks  can  we  render  to  God  in  your  behalf, 
for  all  the  joy  with  which  we  are  joyful  on  your 

10  account ;  (10)  unless  it  be,  that  we  the  more  sup- 
plicate before  God,  by  night  and  by  day,  that  we 
may  see  your  faces,  and  may  perfect  what  is  lack- 

11  ing  in  your  faith  ? — (11.)  And  may  God  our  Father, 
and  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  direct  our  way 

12  unto  you  ;  (12)  and  increase  and  enlarge  your  love 
towards  one  another,  and  towards  all  men,  even  as 

13  we  love  you ;  (13)  and  establish  your  hearts  un- 


•^  or,  be  saved. 


Sy.  by  face. 


or,  minister. 


t-Sy. 


m4oZZ 


«>^T- 


374 


1    THESSALONIANS,     IV. 


Sy. 


^Lojt.. 


Sy. 

of. 


he  in  need 


Sy. 


blamable  in  holiness,  before  God  our  Father ;  at 
the  advent  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  with 
all  his  saints. 

"Wherefore,  my  brethren,   I  entreat  you,   and  IV. 
beseech  you  by  our  Lord  Jesus,  that,  as  ye  have 
received  from  us  how  ye  ought  to  walk,  and  to 
please  God,  so  ye  would  make  progress  more  and 
more.  (2)  For  ye  know  what  command  we  gave  you     2 
in  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah.     (3)  For  this  is  the     3 
pleasure  of  God,  your  sanctification;^  and  that  ye 
be  separated  from  all  whoredom  ;  (4)  and  that  each     4 
one  of  you  might  know  how  to  possess  his  vessel, 
in  sanctity  and  in  honor ;  (5)  and  not  in  the  concu-     5 
piscence  of  lust,  like  the  rest  of  the'  Gentiles  who 
know  not  God  :  (6)  and  that  ye  dare  not  to  trans-     6 
gress  and  to  overreach  any  one  his  brother,  in  this 
matter ;  because  our  Lord  is  the  avenger  of  all  these, 
as  also  we  have  said  and  testified  to  you  in  time     7 
past.   (7)  For  God  did  not  call  you  unto  impurity, 
but  to  sanctification.    (8)  He  therefore  who  spurn-     8 
eth,  spurneth  not  man  but  God,  who  hath  given 
his  Hol}^  Spirit  in  you. — (9)  Now  concerning  love     9 
to  the  brethren,  ye  need  not  that  I  should  write  to 
you  ;  for  3-e  yourselves  are  taught  of  God  to  love 
one  another.     (10)  Ye  likewise  do  so,  to  all  the  10 
brethren  who  are  in  all  Alacedonia :  but  I  entreat 
you,  my  brethren,  to  be  exuberant:  (11)  and  that  11 
ye  strive  to  be  quiet,  and  to  attend  to  j^our  own 
affairs  ;  and  that  ye  labor  with  your  own  hands,  as 
we  directed  you  ;  (12)  and  that  ye  walk  becoming-  12 
ly  towards  those  without ;  and  that  ye  be  depend- 
ent'*  on  no  man. 

And,  I  wish  you  to  know,  my  brethren,  that  ye  13 
should  not   mourn   over  them  who  have  fallen 
asleep,  like  other  people  who  have  no  hope.     (14)  14 
For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died  and  rose  ngain, 
even  so  them  who  sleep,  will  God,  by  Jesus,  bring 
with  him.     (15)  And  this  we  say  to  you,  hy  the  15 
word  of  our  Lord,  tliat  we  who  may  survive  and  be 
alive,  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord,  shall  not  precede 
them  who  have  slept.    (16)  Because  our  Lord  will  16 
himself  descend  from  heaven,  with  the  mandate,^ 
and  Avith  the  voice  of  the  chief  angel,  and  with  the 
trump  of  God  ;  and  the  dead  who  are  in  the  Mes- 
siah, will  first  arise;  (17)  and  then,  we  who  survive  17 


1    THESSALONIANS,    V. 


375 


and  are  alive  shall  be  caught  up  together  with  them 
to  the  clouds,  to  meet  our  Lord  in  the  air ;  and  so 
18  shall  we  be  ever  with  our  Lord.     (18)  Wherefore, 
ccvmfort  ye  one  another  with  these  words. 

V.       But  concerning  the  times  and  seasons,  my  breth- 
2  ren,  ye  need  not  that  I  write  to  you ;  (2)  for  ye 
know   assuredly,   that   the   day   of  our  Lord  so 
8  Cometh,  as  a  thief  by  night.     (3)  While  they  will 
,be  saying.  Peace  and  quietness,  then  suddenly  de- 
struction will  burst  upon  them,  as  distress  upon  a 

4  child-bearer,  and  they  will  not  escape. — (4)  But 
ye,  my  brethren,  are  not  in  darkness,  that  that  day 

5  should  overtake  you  as  a  thief  (o)  For  ye  are 
all  children  of  the  light,  and  children  of  the  day ; 
and  are  not  children  of  the  night,  and  children  of 

6  darkness.  (6)  Let  us  not  therefore  sleep,  like 
others;    but  let  us  be  vigilant  and  considerate.^ 

7  (7)  For  they  who  sleep,  sleep  in  the  night;  and 
they  who  are  drunken,  are  drunken  in  the  night. 

8  (8)  But  let  us  who  are  children  of  the  day,  be 
wakeful  in  mind,  and  put  on  the  breastplate  of 
faith  and  love,  and  take''  the  helmet  of  the  hope 

9  of  life".  (9)  For  God  hath  not  appointed  us  to 
wrath,  but  to  the  acquisition  of  life^^,  by  our  Lord 

10  Jesus  the  Messiah :  (10)  who  died  for  us<?,  that 
whether  we  wake  or  sleep,  we  might  live  together 

11  with  him.  (11)  Therefore  comfort  one  another, 
and  edify  one  another,  as  also  ye  have  done. 

12  j^nd  we  entreat  you,  my  brethren,  that  ye  recog- 
nize them  who  labor  among  3'ou,  and  who  stand 
before  your  faces^  in  our  Lord,  and  instruct  you  : 

13  (13)  that  they  may  be  esteemed  by  you  with  abun- 
dant love;  and,  on  account  of  their  work,  live  ye  in 

14  harmonys  with  them.  (14)  And  we  entreat  you, 
my  brethren,  that  ye  admonish  the  faulty,  and  en- 
courage the  foint-hearted,  and  bear  the  burdens  of 
the  weak,  and  be  long  suffering  towards  all  men. 

15  (15)  And  beware,  lest  any  of  you  return  evil  for 
evil,  but  always  follow^  good  deeds,  towards  one 

16  another,  and  towards  all  men. — (16)  And  be  joyful 

17  always.  (17)  And  pray  without  ceasing,  (18)  And 

18  in  every  thing  be  thankful :  For  this  is  the  pleas- 

19  ure  of  God  in  Jesus  the  Messiah,  concerning  you. 

20  (19)  Quench  not  the  Spirit.  (20)  Despise  not  pro- 

21  phesying.     (21)  Exj^lore  every  thing,  and  hold  fast 


Sy. 
,_aJOCnlD 

Sy.  impose. 
or,  salvation. 
or,  salvation. 
Sy. 
^1  V. 


Sy.  ^  .^r>«o 
Sy. 


Sy.  run  after. 


376 


2   THESSALONIANS,   I. 


the   good:  (22)   and   fly   from   every  thing  evil.  22 
(23)  And  may  the  God  of  peace  sanctify  you  all,  23 
perfectly,  and  keep  blameless  your  whole  spirit, 
and  your  soul,  and  your  body,  till  the  coming  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah.     (2-i)  Faithful  is  he  24 
that  hath  called  you,  who  will  do  it. 

My  brethren,  pray  for  us. — (26)  Salute  all  our  26 
brethren  with  a  holy  kiss.     (27)  I  conjure  you  by  27 
our  Lord,  that  this  epistle  be  read  to  all  the  holy 
brethren. — (28)  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  28 
Messiah  be  with  you.     Amen. 

End  of  the  first  Epistle  to  the   Thessalonians ;   which  was 
written  from  Athens,  and  was  sent  by  the  hands  of  Timothi/. 


The  Second  Epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Thessalonians. 


•  Sy.  ^a^Zj 


''  Sy.  P^^ 
'  Sy.  Pia^ 

^  Sy.  IZjnro 


Paul  and  Sylvanus  and  Timothy,  to  the  church 
of  the  Thessalonians,  which  is  in  God  our  Father 
and  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah  :  (2)  Grace  be  with 
you,  and  peace,  from  God  our  Father,  and  from  our 
Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah. 

We  are  bound  to  give  thanks  to  God  always,  on 
your  account,  my  brethren,  as  it  is  proper ;  because 
your  faith  groweth  exceedingly,  and,  in  you  all,  the 
love  of  each  for  his  fellow  increaseth,  (4)  Inso- 
much that  we  also  boast  of  you  in  the  churches  of 
God,  on  account  of  your  fliith,  and  your  patience  in 
all  the  persecution  and  trials  that  ye  endure ;  (5)  for 
a  demonstration  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God; 
that  ye  may  be  worthy^  of  his  kingdom,  on  account 
of  which  ye  sulfer.  (6)  And  since  it  is  a  righteous 
thing  with  God,  to  recompense  trouble  to  them  that 
trouble  you :  (7)  and  you,  who  are  the  troubled,  he 
will  vivify,  with  us,  at  the  manifestation  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah  from  heaven,  with  the  host** 
of  his  angels;  (8)  when  he  will  execute  vengeance, 
with  the  burning*^  of  lire,  on  them  that  know  not 
God,  aud  on  them  that  acknowledge  not  the  gospel'^ 


2   THESSALONIANS,    II. 


577 


9  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah.  (9)  For  these  will 
be  recompensed  with  the  judgment  of  eternal 
destruction,  from  the  presence  of  our  Lord,  and 

10  from  the  glory  of  his  power ;  (10)  when  he  shall 
come  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints,  and  to  displa}'  his 
wonders  in  his  faithful  ones;  for  our  testimony 
concerning  you,  will  be  believed,  in  that  day. — 

11  (11)  Therefore  we  pray  for  you,  at  all  times;  that 
God  would  make  you  worthy  of  your  calling,  and 
would  fill  you  with  all  readiness  for  good  deeds, 

12  and  with  the  works  of  faith  by  power ;  (12)  so  that 
the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  may  be 
glorified  in  you,  (and)  ye  also  in  him ;  according 
to  the  grace  of  God,  and  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the 
Messiah. 

XL  But  we  entreat  of  you,  my  brethren,  in  regard  to 
the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  and  in 

2  respect  to  our  being  congregated  unto  him,  (2)  that 
ye  be  not  soon  agitated  iu  your  mind,  nor  be 
troubled, — neither  by  word,  nor  by  spirit,  nor  by 
letter,  as  coming  from  us, — that  lo,  the  day  of  our 

3  Lord  is  at  hand.  (3)  Let  no  one  deceive  you  in  any 
way ;  because  [that  day  will  not  come],  unless  there 
previously  come  a  defection,  =^  and  that  man  of  sin 

4  be  revealed,  the  son  of  perdition ;  (4)  who  is  an 
opposer,  and  exalteth  himself  above  all  that  is  called 
God  and  Worshipful  ;b  so  that  he  also  sitteth  in 
the  temple  of  God,  as  a  God,  and  displayeth  him- 

5  self,  as  if  he  were  God. — (5)  Do  ye  not  remember, 
that,  when  I  was  with  you,  I  told  you  these  things? 

6  (6)  And  now,  ye  know  what  hlndereth  his  being 

7  manifested  in  his  time.  (7)  For  the  mystery  of  the 
evil  One  already  beginneth  to  be  operative :  and 
only,  if  that  which  now  hindereth  shall  be  taken 

8  from  the  midst ; — (8)  then  at  length  will  that  evil 
One  be  revealed;  whom  our  Lord  Jesus  will  con- 
sume by  the  breath^  of  his  mouth,  and  will  bring  to 

9  naught  by  the  visibility  of  his  advent.  (9)  For  the 
coming  of  that  [evil  One],  is  the  working  of  Satan, 
with    all   power,  and   signs,  and   lying   wonders, 

10  (10)  and  with  all  the  deceptiveness  of  iniquity,  in 
them  that  perish ;  because  the}"  did  not  receive  the 
love  of  the  truth,  by  which  they  might  have  life."^ 

11  (11)  Therefore  God  will  send  upon  them  the  opera- 
tion of  deception,  that   they  may  believe   a   lie ; 


or,'  rebellion. 


Sy.P 


-Ki?0 


Sv. 


iOf.rD 


^  or,  be  saved. 


878 


2   THESSALONIANS,   III. 


«  or,  sahation. 


Sy.  4^. 


*^y.  disorderly. 


(12)  and  that  they  all  ma}^  be  condemned,  who  be-  12 
lieve  not  the  truth,  but  have  pleasure  in  iniquity. 
— (18)  But  we  are  bound  to  give  thanks  to  God  al-  13 
ways,  on  your  account,  my  brethren  beloved  of  our 
Lord,  that  God  hath  from  the  beginning  chosen 
you  unto  life,e  through  sanctilication  of  the  Spirit, 
and  through  faith  in  the  truth.    (14)  For  unto  these  14 
it  was,  that  God  called  you  by  our  preaching  ;  that 
ye  might  be  the  glory  to  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Mes- 
siah.    (15)  Tlierefore,  my  brethren,  be  established,  15 
and  persevere  in  the  precepts  which  ye  have  been 
taught,  whether  by  word  or  by  our  epistle.     (16)  16 
And  may  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah  himself,  and 
God  our  Father,  Avho  hath  loved  us,  and  given  us 
everlasting  consolation,  and  a  good  hope  through 
his  grace,  (17)  comfort  your  hearts,  and  establish  17 
[}-ou]   in  every  good  word,  and   in    every  good 
work. 


Henceforth,  brethren,  pray  ye  for  us,  that  the  III 
word  of  our  Lord  may,  in  every  place,  run  and  be 
glorified,   as  with  you  ;  (2)  and  that  we  may  be     ^ 
delivered  from  evil  and  perverse  men  ;  for  faith  is 
not  in  all.     (3)  And  faithful  is  the  Lord,  who  will     c 
keep  you  and  rescue  you  from  the  evil  One.     (4)     4 
And  we  have  confidence  in  you,  through  our  Lord, 
that  what  we  have  inculcated  on  you,  ye  both  have 
done,  and  will  do.     (5)  And  may  our  Lord  direct     i 
your  hearts  to  the  lov6  of  God,  and  to  a  patient 
waiting  for  the  Messiah. — (6)  And  we  enjoin  upon 
you,  my  brethren,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
the  Messiah,  that  ye  withdraw  from  every  brother 
who  walkcth  wickedly, '"i  and  not  according  to  the 
precepts  which  ye  received  from  us.     (7)  For  3'^e 
know  how  ye  ought  to  imitate  us,  who  did  not 
walk  wickedly  among  you.      (8)  Neither  did  we 
eat  bread  gratuitously  from  any  of  you ;  but,  with 
toil  and  weariness,  we  labored  by  night  and  by  day, 
that  we  might  not  be  burdensome  to  any  of  you. 
(9)  It  was  not  because  we  have  no  authorit}^,  •>  but 
that  we  might  give  you  an  example  in  ourselves, 
that  ye  might  imitate  us.     (10)  And  while  we  were 
with  you,  we  also  gave  you  this  precept,  That  every 
one  who  would  not  work,  should  likewise  not  eat, 
(11)  B'or  we  hear,  there  are  some  among  you  who  11 
walk  wickedly, <=  and  do  nothing  except  vain  things. 


6 


9 
10 


1   TIMOTHY,    I. 


379 


12  (12)  Now  such  persons,  we  command  and  exliort, 
by  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  that  in  quietness 

13  they  work,  and  eat  their  own  bread.  (13)  And 
my  brethren,  let  it  not  be  wearisome  to  you,  to  do 

14  Avhat  is  good.*!  (14)  And  if  any  one  hearkeneth 
not  to  these  [my]  words  in  this  epistle,  separate 
that  man  from  you,  and  have  no  intimacy  witli  him, 

15  that  he  may  be  ashamed.  (15)  Yet,  hold  him  not 
as  an  enemy,  but  admonish   him  as  a  brother. — 

16  (16)  And  may  the  Lord  of  peace  give  you  peace, 
always,  in  every  thing.     Our  Lord  be  with  you  all. 

17  Tlie  salutation  in  the  writing  of  my  own  hand,  I 
Paul  have  written  it ;  which  is  the  token  in  all  my 

18  epistles,  so  I  write,  (18)  The  grace  of  Jesus  the 
Messiah  be  with  you  all,  my  brethren.     Amen. 

Eml  of  llie  second  Epistle  to  the  Tbessalonians ;  which  was 
written  from  Laodicea  of  Pisidia,  and  loas  sent  by  the  hands  of 
Tychicus. 


^  Sy.  ;  «  g^  « 


The  First  Epistle  of  Paul  to  Timothy. 


I.  Paul,  a  legate  of  Jesus  the  Messiah,  by  the 
command  of  God  our  life-giver,^  and  of  the  Mes- 

2  siah,  Jesus  our  hope ;  (2)  to  Timothy,  [my]  true 
son  in  the  faith :  grace  and  mercy  and  peace,  from 
God  our  Father,  and  the  Messiah,  Jesus  our  Lord. 

3  When  I  was  going  into  Macedonia,  I  requested 
thee  to  remain  at  Ephesus,  and  to  charge  certain 

4  persons  not  to  teach  different  doctrines ;  (4)  and 
not  to  throw  themselves  into  fables  and  stories 
about  genealogies,  of  which  there  is  no  end,  which 
produce  contention  rather  than  edification  in  the 

5  faith  of  God. — (5)  Now  the  end^  of  the  command 
is  love,  which  is  from  a  pure  heart,  and  from  a 

6  good  conscience,  and  from  true  faith.  (6)  But  from 
these  some  have  strayed,  and  have  turned  aside  to 

7  vain  words ;  (7)  because  they  wished  to  be  teachers 


or,  our  Sa- 
viour. 


Sy.  CTLOn), 
i.  e.  scope, 
design. 


380 


1   TIMOTHY,    II. 


Sy.  ;_i„2Lj 


^  Sy.  Gospel  of 
the  glory  of, 


or,  to  save. 
Sy.  *i^,r) 


of  the  law,  while  they  understood  not  what  they 
speak,  nor  the  thing  about  which  they  contend. 
(6)  Now,  we  know,  that  the  law  is  a  good^  thing,  if     8 
a  man  conduct  himself  in  it,  according  to  the  law, 

(9)  he  knowing  that  the  law  was  not  established  for     9 
the  rigliteous,  but  for  the  evil,  and  the  rebellious, 
and  the  ungodly,  and  the  sinful,  and  the  perverse, 
and  for  the  impure,  and  for  smiters  of  their  fathers 
and  smiters  of  their  mothers,  and  for  murderers, 

(10)  and  for  whoremongers,  and  for  copulators  with  10 
males,  and  for  the  stealers  of  free  people,  and  for 
liars,  and  for  violators  of  (5aths,  and  for  whatever  is 
contrary  to  sound  doctrine,  (11)  [namely]  that  of   11 
the  glorious  gospel'^  of  the  blessed  God,  with  which 

am    intrusted.      (12)    And   I   thank   him    who  12 
strengthened  me,  [even]  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Mes- 
siah ;  who  accounted  ■  me  faithful,  and    appointed 
me  to  his  ministry ;  (13)  me  [I  say],  who  before  13 
was  a  blasphemer,  and  a  persecutor,  and  a  reviler ; 
but  I  obtained  mercy,  because  I  did  it  while  igno- 
rant and  without  faith.     (1-1)  And  in  me  the  grace  14 
of  our  Lord  abounded,  and  faith  and  love,  whicli 
is  in  Jesus  the  Messiah.    (15)  Faithful  is  the  dec-  15 
laration,  and  worthy  to  be  received,  that  Jesus  the 
Messiah  came  into  the  world  to  give  life^  to  sinners, 
of  whom  I  was  the  primary.^      (16)  But  for  this  16 
cause  had  he  mercy  on  me,  that  in  me  first  Jesus 
the  Messiah  might  display  all  his  long  suffering,  for 
an  example  to  them  who  were  to  believe  on  him 
unto  life  eternal.     (17)  And  to  the  king  eternal,  17 
incorruptible,  and  invisible,  the  sole  God,  be  honor 
and  glory  for  ever  and  ever!     Amen. — (18)  This  18 
injunction  I  commit  to  thee,  my  son  Timothy,  ac- 
cording to  the  former  predictions  concerning  tliee, 
that  in  them  thou  mightest  war  this  good  warfare, 

(19)  in  faith  and  a  good  conscience ;  for  they  v/ho  19 
have  repudiated  this,  have  become  destitute  ot'f  lith  ; 

(20)  like  Ilymeneus  and  Alexander,  whom  I  have  20 
delivered  up  to  Satan,  that  they  may  learn  not  to 

be  blasphemers. 

I  exhort  thee,  therefore,  first  of  all,  that  thou  IL 
present  to  God  supplication,  and  prayer,  and  inter- 
cession, and    thanksgiving,  for  all    men:    (2)    for     2 
kings  and  magistrates,  that  we  may  dwell  in  a  quiet 
and  tranquil  habitation,  with  all  reverence  for  God, 


1    TIMOTHY,    III. 


381 


3  and  with  purity.     (3)  For  this  is  good  and  accept- 

4  able  before  God  our  life-giver  ;a-  (4)  who  would 
have  all  men  live,^  and  be  converted  to  the  knowl- 

5  edge  of  the  truth.  (5)  For  God  is  one ;  and  the 
mediator^  between  God  and  men  is  one,  [namely] 

6  the  man  Jesus  the  Messiah ;  (6)  who  gave  himself  a 
ransom^^  for  every  man ; — a  testimony  that  arrived 

7  in  due  time,  (7)  of  which  I  am  constituted  ^i  herald 
and  legate.  I  speak  the  truth,  and  do  not  lie,  for  I 
am  the  teacher  of  the  Gentiles  in  the  belief  of  the 

8  truth. — (8)  I  desire  therefore,  that  men  may  pray 
in  every  place,  while  they  lift  up  their  hands  with 
purity,  without  wrath,   and  without    disputations. 

9  (9)  So  also,  that  women  [appear]  in  a  chaste  fashion 
of  dress  ;  and  that  their  adorning  be  with  modesty 
and  chastity  ;  not  with  curls,  or  Avith  gold,  or  with 
pearls,  or  with  splendid  robes ;  (10)  but  with  good 
works,  as  becometh  women  who  profess  reverence 
for  God. — (11)  Let  a  woman  learn  in  silence,  with 
all  submission  :  (12)  for  I  do  not  allow  a  woman  to 
teach,  or  to  be  assuming  over  the  man  ;  but  let  her 
remain  in  stillness.     (13)  For  Adam  was  first  form- 

14  ed,  and  then  Eve.  (14)  And  Adam  was  not  seduced, 
but  the  woman  was  seduced  and  transgressed  the 
command.  (15)  Yet  she  shall  live^  by  means  of 
her  children,  if  they  continue  in  the  faith,  and  in 
love,  and  in  sanctity,  and  in  chastity. 


10 

11 
12 

13 


15 


III.  It  is  a  faithful  saying,  that  if  a  man  desireth  the 
2  eldershiiD,^  he  desireth  a  good  work.  (2)  And  an 
elder''  ought  to  be  such,  that  no  blame  can  be  found 
in  him  ;  and  he  should  be  the  husband  of  one  wife, 
with  a  vigilant  mind,  and  sober  and  regular  [in  his 
habits],  and  affectionate  to  strangers,  and  instruct- 
8  ive  ]'^  (3)  and  not  a  transgressor  in  regard  to  Avine, 
and  whose  hand  is  not  swift  to  strike ;  but  he 
should  be  humble,  and  not  contentious,  nor  a  lover 

4  of  money  ;  (4)  and  one  that  guideth<i  well  his  own 
house,  and  holdeth  his  children  in  subjection  with 

5  all  purity.     (5)  For  if  he  knoweth  not  how  to  guide 
his  own  house  well,  how  can  he  guide  the  church 

6  of  God.     (6)  Neither  let  him  be  of  recent  disciple- 
ship  ;  lest  he  be  uplifted,  and  fall  into  the  condemna- 

7  tion  of  Satan.     (7)   And  there  ought  to  be  good 
testimony  of  him  from  those  without ;  lest  he  fall 

8  into  reproach  and  the  snare  of  Satan. — (8)  And  so 


*  or,  Saviour. 
^  or,  be  saved. 

^  Sy.  "Ul^ 

d  Sy. 


^  or,  be  saved. 


'Sy. 

//icGr.sVio'x'j'TrT^. 

"Sy. 
I  a.i  a  0  = 

Gr.  sirirfxo'Tfog. 

■^Sy. 

d  Sy.  ^^o 


S82 


1    TIMOTHY,    IV. 


«  Sy. 

Gr.  Otuxovoi. 
f  Sy. 


eSy 


^!J' 


also  the  deacons'^  sliould  be  pure,  and  not  speak 
double,  nor  incline  to  much  wine,  nor  love   base 
gains ;  (9)  but  should  hold  the  mj^stery  of  the  faith     9 
with  a  pure  conscience.     (10)  And  let  them  be  first  10 
tried,  and  then  let  them  serve,^  if  they  are  without 
blame.     (11)  So  also  should  the  wives  be  chaste,  11 
and  of  vigilant  minds  ;  and  they  should  be  faithful 
in  all  things ;  and  they  should  not  be  slanderers. 

(12)  Let  the  deacons  be  such  as  have  each  one  wife,  12 
and    guide    well   their   children    and   households. 

(13)  For  they  who  serve  well  [as  deacons],  procure  13 
for  themselves  a  good  degree, s  and  much  boldness 
in  the  faith  of  Jesus  the  Messiah. 

These  things  I  write  to  thee,  while  hoping  soon  14 
to  come  to  thee ;  (15)  but  if  I  should  d jlay,  that  15 
thou  mayest  know  how  thou  oughtest  to  conduct 
thyself  in  the  house  of  God,  which  is  the  church  of 
the  living  God.* — The  pillar  and  the  foundation  of 
the  truth,  (16)  and  truly  great,  is  this  mystery  of   16 
righteousness, h  which  was  revealed'  in  the  flesh,  and 
justified  in  the  spirit,  and  seen  by  angels,  and  pro- 
claimed among  the  Gentiles,  and  believed  on  in  the 
world,  and  received  up  into  glory. — (IV.)  But  the  IV. 
Spirit  saith  explicitl}*,  that  in  the  latter  times,  some 
will  depart  from  the  faith  ;  and  will  go  after  decep- 
tive   spirits,    and  after   the   doctrine   of    demons. 

(2)  These  Avill  seduce,  by  a  false  appearance ;  and  will     2 
utter  a  lie,  and  will  be  seared  in  their  conscience  ; 

(3)  and  will  forbid  to   marry;    and  will   require     3 
abstinence  from  meats,  which  God  hath  created  for 
use  and  for  thankfulness,  by  them  who  believe  and 
know  the  truth.     (-1)  Because  whatever  is  created     4 
by  God  is  good ;  and  there  is  nothing  which  should 
be  rejected^'  if  it  be  received  with  thankfulness  ; 
(5)  for  it  is  sanctified  by  the  word  of  God  and  by     5 
prayer. — (6)  If  thou  shalt  inculcate  these  things  on     6 
thy  brethren,  thou  wilt  be  a  good  minister^'of  Jesus 
the  Messiah,  being  educated  in  the  language  of  the 
foith,  and  in  the  good  doctrine  which  thou  hast 
been  taught.     (7)  But  the  silly  talcs  of  old  women,     7 
shun  thou ;  and  occupy  thyself  with  righteousness. 
(8) '  For,  exercising  the  body  is  profitable  a  little    8 

*  The  sfnicture  of  tlicse  sentences  is  the  same  in  the  Syriac  and  in  the  Greek  ; 
and  by  tulluuing  tlie  punctuation  of  Griesbach,  Knapp,  and  otiier  modern  editors 
of  the  Greek  Testament,  the  Syriac  is  accurately  translated  as  above.  The  read- 
ing of  05  or  0;  instead  of  Qsog,  in  verse  IG,  is  supported  by  tlic  Syriac  version. 


"  Sy.  Uc^  1115' 

1Zqj]£35 
•Sy. 


*  or,  abomina- 
ted. 

^  Sy. 

1 1  m'^r>m,^n 


1   TIMOTHY,    V. 


383 


while ;  but  rigliteousness  is  every  way  profitable  and 

liath  promise  of  the  life  of  the  present  time  and  of  that 

9  to  come.   (9)  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of 

10  reception.  (10)  For  on  this  account,  we  toil  and  suffer 
reproach  ;  because  we  trust  in  the  living  God,  who 
is  the  life-giverc  of  all  men,  especially  of  the  believers. 

11  (11)  These  things  teach  thou,  and  inculcate. 

12  And  let  no  one  despise  thy  youth ;  but  be  thou  a 
pattern  for  th?  believers,  in  speech,  and  in  behavior, 

13  and  in  love,  and  in  faith,  and  in  purity.  (13)  Un- 
til I  come,  be  diligent  in  reading,  and  in  prayer 

14  and  in  teaching.  (14)  Despise  not  the  gift  that  is 
in  thee,  which  was  given  thee  by  prophecy,  and  by 

15  the  laying  on  of  the  hand  of  the  eldership.<i  (15)  On 
these  things  meditate  ;  give  thyself  wholly  to  them  : 
that  it  may  be  obvious  to  all  that  thou  niakest  ad- 

16  vances.  (16)  Be  attentive  to  thyself,  and  to  thy 
teaching ;  and  persevere  in  them.  For  in  doing 
this,  thou  wilt  procure  life"  to  thyself  and  to  them 

Y.  who  hear  thee. — (V.)  Chide  not  an  elder,  ^^  but 
entreat  him  as  a  father ;  and  the  younger  men,  as 

2  thy  brothers ;  (2)  and  the  elder  women, ^^  as  mothers; 
and  the  younger  women,  as  thy  sisters,  with  all 

3  purity. — (3)  Honor  widows,  who  are  truly  widows. 

4  (4)  But  if  a  widow  hath  children,  or  grandchildren, 
let  them  first  learn  to  show  kindness  to  their  own 
households,  and  to  repay  the  obligations  to  their 

5  parents ;  for  this  is  acceptable  before  God.  (5)  Now 
she  who  is  truly  a  widow,  and  solitary, — ^her  hope 
is  in  God ;  and  she  persevereth  in  prayers,  and  in 

6  supplications,  by  night  and  by  day :  (6)  But  she 
who  foUoweth  pleasure,  is  dead  while  she  liveth. 

7  (7)  These  things  enjoin  thou  on  them,  that  they 

8  may  be  blameless.  (8)  But  if  any  one  careth  not 
for  them  who  are  his  OAvn,  and  esj^ecially  for  them 
who  are  of  the  household^  of  faith,  he  hath  rejected 
the   faith,    and   is    worse    than    the    unbelievers. 

9  (9)  Therefore  elect  thou  the  widow,  who  is  not  less 
than  sixty  years  [old],  and  who  hath  been  the  wife 

10  of  one  man,  (10)  and  hath  a  reputation  for  good 
works ; — if  she  have  trained  up  children,  if  she  have 
entertained  strangers,  if  she  have  washed  the  feet 
of  saints,  if  she  have  relieved  the  afflicted,  if  she 

11  have  walked  in  every  good  work.  (11)  But  the 
younger  widows  do  thou  reject ;  for  they  wax  wan- 
ton'i  against  the  Messiah,  and  desire  to  be  married  : 


"  or,  Saviour. 


Sy. 


«  or,  save. 

'■  Sy.  [ «»  «  «»  n 

-Sy. 


Sy.  sons  of  the 
house. 


Sy.  ^'U^ 


384 


1    TIMOTHY,    VI. 


Sy.l 


<i  ■  fi.O 


Sy. 


sy-l 


■» « » i^ 


Some  copies 
read  men. 


Sy.  UOr^Hi. 


(12)  and  their  condemnation  is  fixed,  because  they  12 
have  cast  off  their  former  faith,     (13)  And  they  13 
also  learn  idleness,  wandering  from  house  to  house; 
and  not  only  idleness,  but  also  to  talk  much,  and 
to  pursue  vanities,  and  to  utter  what  they  ought 
not.     (14)  I  would  therefore,  that  the  younger  wo-  14 
men  marry,  and  bear  children,  and  regulate  their 
houses ;  and  that  they  give  no  occasion  to  the  ad- 
versary for  reproach.     (15)  For  some  have  already  15 
begun  to  turn  aside  after  Satan.     (16)  If  any  be-  16 
lieving  man  or  believing  woman  have  widows,  let 
them  support  them ;  and  let  them  not  be  a  burden 
on  the  church ;  so  that  there  may  be  a  sufficiency 
for  such  as  are  really  widows.-^(17)  Let  the  elders^  17 
who  conduct*"  themselves  well,  be  esteemed  worthy 
of  double  honor ;  especially  they  who  labor  in  the 
word  and  in  doctrine.    (18)  lor  the  scripture  saith,  18 
Thou  shalt  not  muzzle  the  ox  in  threshing ;  and. 
The  laborer  is  worthy  of  his  pay. — (19)  Against  an  19 
elder, "^  receive  not  a  complaint,  except  at  the  mouth 
of  two  or  three  witnesses. — (20)  Those  who  sin  be-  20 
fore  all,  rebuke;   that  the  rest  of  the  people  may 
fear. — (21)  I  charge  thee,  before  God,  and  our  Lord  21 
Jesus  the  Messiah,  and  his  elect  angels,  that  thou 
observe  these  things;   and  let  not  your  mind  be 
preoccupied  by  any  thing :  and  do  nothing  with  a 
respect  for  persons. — (22)  Lay  not  the  hand  hastily  22 
on  any  man ;  and  participate  not  in  the  sins  of 
others;    keep   thyself  pure, — (23)  And   hereafter  23 
drink  not  water,  but  drink  a  little  wine ;  on  account 
of  thy  stomach,  and  thy  continuing  infirmities. — 
(24)  There  are  persons,  whose  sins  are  known,  and  24 
go  before  them  to  the  place  of  judgment ;  and  there 
are  some,  whom  they  follow  after.     (25)  So  also  25 
good  deedsh  are  known :  and  those  which  are  other- 
wise cannot  be  hid.  . 

Let  them  who  are  under  the  yoke  of  servitude, f^YL 
hold  their  masters  in  all  honor ;  lest  the  name  of 
God  and  his  doctrine  be  reproached.  (2)  And  let  2 
them  who  have  believing  masters,  not  treat  them 
with  disrespect,  because  they  are  their  brethren; 
but  let  them  be  more  obedient,  because  they  are 
believers  and  beloved,  in  whose  service  they  enjoy 
quietness.  These  things  teach  thou,  and  request  of 
them. 


1   TIMOTHY,    VI. 


385 


3  But  if  there  be  any  one,  who  teacheth  a  different 
doctrine,  and  doth  not  accede  to  the  salutary  words 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  and  to  the  doctrine 

4  of  the  fear  of  God,  (4)  he  is  one  that  exalteth  him- 
self, while  he  knoweth  nothing;  and  he  languish- 
eth^  in  the  search  and  inquiry  about  words,  from 
which  come  envy,  and  contention,  and  railing,  and 

5  evil  surmising,  (5)  and  the  disputation  of  men, 
whose  minds  are  corrupt  and  destitute  of  the  truth, 
and  who  suppose  that  gain  is  godliness.     But  from 

6  these  stand  thou  aloof.  (6)  But  great  is  our  gain, 
which  is  the  fear  of  God,  with  tlie  use  of  our  com- 

7  iDctence.  (7)  For  we  brought  nothing  into  the 
Avorld ;  and  we  know  that  we  can  carry  nothing  out 

8  of  it.     (8)  Therefore,  food  and  clothing  satisfy  us. 

9  (9)  But  they  who  desire  to  become  rich,  fall  into  temp- 
tations, and  into  snares,  and  into  many  lusts  which 
are  foolish  and  hurtful,  and  which  drown  men  in 

10  destruction  and  perdition:  (10)  for  the  love  of 
money  is  the  root  of  all  these  evils.  And  there 
are  some  who,  coveting  it,  have  erred  from  the 
faith,  and  brought  themselves  into  many  sorrows. — 

11  (11)  But  thou,  O  man  of  God,  flee  from  these  things ; 
and  follow  after  rio-hteousness,  and  rectitude,  and 
faith,    and    love,    and     patience,    and    humility. 

12  (12)  And  contend  in  the  good  contest  of  faith  ;  and 
lay  hold  of  life  eternal,  to  which  thou  art  called, 
and  [of  which]  thou  hast  confessed  a  good  confes- 

13  sion  before  many  witnesses.  (13)  I  charge^  thee, 
before  God,  who  quickeneth  all,  and  [before]  Jesus 
the  Messiah  who  attested  a  good  testimony  before 

14  Pontius  Pilate,  (14)  that  thou  keep  the  injunction, 
without  stain,  and  without  blemish,  until  the  mani- 

15  festationof  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah  ;  (15)  which'' 
God  will,  in  due  time  make  visible ;  [God]  the  bless- 
ed and  only  Potentate,  the  King  of  kings,  and  the 

16  Lord  of  lords;  (16)  who  only  is  incorruptible,  and 
dwelleth  in  light  to  which  no  one  can  approach ;  and 
whom  no  man  hath  seen,  or  even  can  see :  to  him 
be  glory  and  dominion  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 

17  Charge  the  rich  of  this  world,  that  they  be  not 
uphfted  in  their  minds  ;  and  that  they  confide  not 
in  riches,  in  which  is  no  security ;  but  in  the  living 
God,  who  giveth  us  all  things  abundantly  for  our 

18  comfort:  (18)  and  that  they  do  good  works,  and 
be  rich  in  well-doings ;  and  be  ready  to  give  and 


Sy.  cijtl) 


Sy.  jcnmlD 


^  or,  whom. 


386 


2   TIMOTHY,    I. 


19 


20 


to  communicate :  (19)  and  that  they  lay  up  for 
themselves  a  good  foundation  for  that  ^Yllich  is 
future ;  that  they  may  take  hold  of  real  life. 

0  Timothy,  be  careful  of  that  which  is  committed 
to  thee ;  and  shun  vain  words,  and  the  oppositions 
of  false  science:  (21)  for  they  who  profess  it,  have  21 
erred  from  the  faith.     Grace  be  with  thee.     Amen. 

End  of  the  first  Epistle  to  Timothy  ;  ivhich  was  written  from 
Laodicea. 


Tlie  Second  Epislle  of  Paul  to  Tiiiiotliy. 


or,  salvation. 


•>  Sy.  wake  up. 


or,  saved. 


Paul,  a  legate  of  Jesus  the  Messiah  by  the  pleas-    I, 
ure  of  God,  according  to  the  promise  of  lifc^  which 
is  in  Jesus  the  Messiah ;  (2)  to  Timothy  a  beloved     2 
son;  grace,  and  mercy,  and  peace,  from  God  the 
Father,  and  from  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah. 

I  thank  God,  whom  I  serve  from  my  forefathers     3 
with  a  pure  conscience,  that  I  continually  remem- 
ber thee  in  my  prayers,   by  night  and  by  day: 
(4)  and  I  desire  to  see  thee,  and  I  call  to  mind  thy     4 
tears ;  that  I  may  be  filled  with  joy,  (5)  by  the     5 
recollection  which  I  have,  by  thy  genuine  faith, 
which  dwelt  first  in  thy  grandmother  Lois,  and  in 
thy  mother  Eunice,  and  also,  I  am  persuaded,  in 
thee. — (6)  Wherefore  I  remind  thee,  that  thou  ex-     6 
cite''  the  gift  of  God,  that  is  in  thee  by  the  imposi- 
tion of  my  hands.     (7)  For  God  hath  not  given  us     7 
a  spirit  of  fear,  but  of  energy,  and  of  love,  and  of 
instruction.     (8)  Therefore  be  not  thou  ashamed  of     8 
the  testimony  of  our  Lord,  nor  of  me  his  prisoner  ; 
but  endure  evils  in  connection  with   the  Gospel, 
through  the  power  of  God ;  (9)  who  hath  vivified^     9 
us,  and  called  us  with  a  holy  calling;  not  accord- 
ing to  our  works,  but  according  to  his  good  pleas- 
ure, and  his  grace  that  was  given  us  in  Jesus  the 
'Messiah  from  time   before  the   ages,   (10)  and  is  10 


2   TIMOTHY,    II. 


887 


now  made  known  by  tlie  appearing  of  our  Yiviiier,^ 
Jesus  the  Messiah;  who  hath  abolished  death,  and 
hath  made  manifest  life  and  immortality,  by  the 

11  gospel :  (11)  of  which  I  am  constituted  a  herald 
and    a    legate,    and    a    teacher   of  the   Gentiles. 

12  (12)  Therefore  I  suffer  these  things :  and  I  am  not 
ashamed ;  for  I  know  in  whom  I  have  believed,  and 
I  am  persuaded,  that  he  is  competent  to  keep  for 

13  me  my  deposit  against  that  day. — (13)  Let  the 
forme  of  sound  words,  which  thou  hast  heard  from 
me,  abide  with  thee ;  with  faith  and  love,  in  Jesus 

14  the  Messiah.     (11)  Keep  thou  the  good  deposit,  by 

15  the  Holy  Spirit  who  dwelleth  in  us. — (15)  This 
thou  knowest,  that  all  those  in  Asia  have  turned 
from  me ;  and  that  among  them  are  Phygellus  and 

16  Hermogenes.  (16)  May  our  Lord  bestow  mercy 
on  the  house  of  Onesiphorus ;  for,  many  times,  he 
refreshed  me,  and  was  not  ashamed  of  the  chains 

17  of  my  imprisonment.  (17)  But  also,  when  he  came 
to  Kome,   he  sought  for  me  with  diligence,  and 

18  found  me.  (18)  May  our  Lord  grant  him,  that  he 
may  find  mercy  with  our  Lord,  in  that  day.  And 
how  he  ministered  to  me  at  Ephesus,  thou  yevj 
welK  knowest. 

XL      Thou  therefore,  my  son,  be  strong  in  the  grace 

2  which  is  by  Jesus  the  Messiah.     (2)  And  the  things 

thou  hast  heard  from  me  by  many  witnesses,  these 

commit  thou  to  faithful  men,  who  are  com]3etent  to 

8  teach  others  also. — (3)  And  endure  evils,  as  a  good 

4  soldier  of  Jesus  the  Messiah.  (4)  No  man,  on  be- 
coming a  soldier,  entangleth  himself  with  the  busi- 
ness of  the  world ;  that  he  may  please  him  who  en- 

5  listed^  him.  (5)  And  if  one  contend  [in  the  games], 
he  is  not  crowned,  unless  he  contendeth  according 

6  to  the  rules.     (6)  The  husbandman  who  laborcth, 

7  ought  first  to  feed  on  his  fruits.  (7)  Consider  what 
I  say.     Our  Lord  give  thee  wisdom  in  all  things. 

8  (8)  Be  mindful  of  Jesus  the  Messiah,  that  he  arose 
from  the  dead ;  who  was  of  the  seed  of  David,  ac- 

9  cording  to  my  gospel,  (9)  in  which  I  sufl'er  evils 
unto  bonds,  as  if  an  evil-doer :  but  the  word  of  God 

10  is  not  in  bonds.  (10)  Therefore  I  endure  ever}' 
thing,  for  the  elect's  sake ;  that  they  also  may  ob- 
tain life,b  in  Jesus  the  Messiah,  with  eternal  glory. 

11  (11)  Faithful  is  the  saying,  For  if  we  shall  have 


•^  or,  Saviour. 


Sy.  l5Q^, 
pattern,  exetn- 
plar. 


Sy.  abuiir- 
danlly. 


Sy.  selected. 


or,  salvation. 


383 


2   TIMOTHY,    III. 


Sy.  "pib 


•iSy.'jAm'jA^ 


or,  may  coine 
to  their  con- 


died  with  him,  we  shall  also  live  with  him ;  (12)  and,  12 
if  we  shall  have  suffered,  we  shall  also  reiga  with 
him.     But  if  we  shall  have  rejected  him,  he  will 
reject  us.     (13)  And  if  we  shall  have  not  believed  in  13 
him,  he  abideth  in  his  fidelity ;  for  he  cannot  reject 
himself. — (14)  Of  these  things  admonish  thou  them ;   1-1 
and  charge  [them,]  before  our  Lord,  that  the}'  dis- 
pute not,  with  unprofitable  words,  to  the  subversion 
of  those  who  hear  them.    (15)  And  study  to  present  15 
thyself  before  God,  perfectly,  a  laborer  who  is  not 
ashamed,  one  who  correctly  announceth  the  word  of 
truth.    (16)  Avoid  vain  discourses,^  in  which  there  is  16 
no  profit ;  for  they  very  much  add  to  the  wickedness 
of  those  occupied  with  them.     (17)  And  their  dis-  17 
course,  like  an  eating  eancer,  will  lay  hold  upon  many. 
And  one  of  these  is  Hymeneus,  and  another  Phile- 
tus ;  (18)  who  have  wandered  from  the  truth,  while  18 
they  say,  The  resurrection  of  the  dead  hath  passed : 
and  they  subvert  the  faith  of  some.     (19)  But  the  19 
firm  foundation^  of  God  standeth ;  and  it  hath  this 
seal.  The  Lord  knoweth  them  who  are  his :  and, 
Let  every  one  who  invoketh  the  name  of  our  Lord, 
stand  aloof  from  iniquity.     (20)  But  in   a  great  20 
house,  there  are  not  only  vessels  of  gold  or  silver, 
but  also  of  wood  and  of  pottery ;  and  some  of  them 
for  honor,  and  some  for  dishonor.     (21)  If  there-  21 
fore  any  one  purge  himself  fi'om  these  things,  he 
will  be  a  pure  vessel  for  honor,  fit  for  the  use  of  his 
Lord,  and  prepared  for  every  good  work. — (22)  Fly  22 
from  all  the  lusts  of  youth ;  and  follow  after  righ- 
teousness, and  faith,  and  love,  and  peace,  with  them 
that  invoke  our  Lord  with  a  pure  heart.    (23)  Avoid  23 
those  foolish  discussions  which  afibrd  no  instruc- 
tion ;  for  thou  knowest,  that  they  generate  contests. 
(24)  And  a  servant  of  our  Lord  ought  not  to  con-  24 
tend,  but  to  be  mild  towards  every  one,  and  in- 
structive, and  patient ;  (25)  that  with  mildness  he  25 
may  enlighten  those  who  dispute  against  him,  if 
perhaps  God  may  give  them  repentance,  and  they 
may  acknowledge  the  truth,  (26)  and  may  recollect  26 
themselves,"  and  may  escape  out  of  the  snare  of  Sa- 
tan, at  whose  pleasure  they  have  been  held  ensnared. 

But  this  know  thou,  that  in  the  latter  days  hard  III. 
times    will  come:  (2)  and  men  will  be  lovers  of  2 
themselves,  and  lovers  of  money,  boasters,  proud, 


2   TIMOTHY,    IV. 


889 


censorious,  unyielding  towards  their  own  people, 

3  den  jers  of  grace,  wicked,  (3)  calumniators,  addict- 
ed to  concupiscence,  ferocious,  haters  of  the  good, 

4  (-i)  treacherous,  rash,  inflated,  attached  to  pleasure 

5  more  than  to  the  love  of  Grod,  (5)  having  a  form^^ 
of  respect  for  God,  but  wide  from  the  power  of  God. 

6  Them  who  are  such,  repel  from  thee.  (6)  For  of 
them  are  they  who  creep  into  this  and  that  house, 
and  captivate  the  women  who  are  plunged  in  sins 

7  and  led  away  by  divers  lusts,  (7)  who  are  always 
learning,  and  can  never  come  to  the  knowledge  of 

8  the  truth.  (8)  Now  as  Jannes  and  Jambres  with- 
stood Moses,  so  also  do  these  withstand  the  truth : 
men  whose  mind  is  corrupted,  and  [they]   repro- 

9  bates  from  the  fliith.  (9)  But  they  Avill  not  make 
progress,  for  their  infatuation  will  be  understood  by 

10  every  one,  as  theirs  also  was  understood. — (10)  But 
tliou  hast  followed  after  my  doctrine,  and  my  man- 
ner of  life,  and  my  aims,  and  my  faith,  and  my 
long  suffering,    and  my  love,    and   my    patience, 

11  (11)  and  my  persecution,  and  my  sufferings.  And 
thou  knowest  what  I  endured  at  Antioch,  and  at 
Iconium,  and  at  Lystra;  what  persecution  I  en- 
dured: and  from  all  these  my  Lord  delivered  me. 

12  (12)  And  likewise  all,  who  choose  to  live  in  the 
fear  of  God,  in  Jesus  the  Messiah,  will  be  perse 

13  cuted.  (13)  But  evil  and  seducing  men  will  add 
to  their  wickedness,  while  they  deceive  and  are  de- 

1-1  ceived,  (14)  But  continue  thou  in  the  things  thou 
hast  learned  and  been  assured  of;  for  thou  knowest 

15  from  whom  thou  learnedst;  (15)  because  from  thy 
childhood,  thou  wast  taught  the  holy  books,  which 
can  make  thee  wise  unto  life,''  by  faith  in  Jesus  the 

16  Messiah. — (16)  All  scripture  that  was  written  by 
the  Spirit,  is  profitable  for  instruction,  and  for  con- 
futation, and  for  correction,  and  for  erudition  in 

17  righteousness;  (17)  that  the  man  of  God  may  be- 
come perfect,  and  complete  for  every  good  work. — 

IV.(IV.)  I  charge  thee,  before  God,  and  our  Lord  Je- 
sus the  Messiah,  who  is  to  judge  the  living  and  the 

2  dead,  at  the  manifestation  of  his  kingdom,  (2)  Pro- 
claim the  word ;  and  persist  [in  it]  with  diligence, 
in  time  and  out  of  time;^  admonish,  and  rebuke, 

3  with  all  patience  and  instructivencss.  (3)  For  the 
time  will  come,  when  they  will  not  give  ear  to 
sound  teaching ;  but,  according  to  their  lusts,  will 


'Sy. 


^  or,  salvation. 


i.  e.  at  regular 
times,  and 
times  not 
regular. 


390 


2  TIMOTHY,    IV. 


"Sy. 


or,  appearing. 


Sy.  IZoiO^ 


9 
10 

11 


multiply  to  themselves  teachers,  in  the  itching  of 
their  hearing ;  (4)  and  will  turn  awaj  their  ears 
from  the  truth,  and  incline  after  fables.  (5)  But  be 
thou  vigilant  in  all  things ;  and  endure  evils,  and 
do  the  work  of  an  evangelist, '^  and  fnlfill  thy  minis- 
try.— (6)  Bat  I  am  soon  to  bo  immolated;  and  the 
time  of  my  dissolution  hath  come.  (7)  I  have 
fought  a  good  combat,  I  have  completed  my  race, 
I  have  preserved  my  fidelity ;  (8)  and  henceforth 
there  is  preserved  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness, 
with  which  my  Lord,  the  righteous  Judge,  will  re- 
compense me  in  that  day ;  and  not  me  only,  but 
them  also  who  love  his  manifestation. <= 

Exert  thyself  to  come  to  me  quickly.     (10)  For 
Demas  hath  left  me ;'  and  hath  loved  this  world, 
and  gone  away  to  Thessalonica ;  Crispus  to  Gala- 
tia,  Titus  to  Dalmatia.     (11)  Luke  only  is  with  me. 
Take  Mark,  and  bring  him  with  thee;  for  he  is 
suitable  for  me,  for  ministration.     (12)  And  Tych-  12 
icus  I  have  sent  to  Ephesus.     (13)  And  when  thou  13 
comest,  bring  the  bookcase,  which  I  left  at  Troas 
with  Carpus,  and  the  books,  but  especially  the  roll 
of  parchments. — (14)  Alexander  the   coppersmith 
showed  me  many  ills:   our  Lord  will  reward  him 
according  to  his  doings.     (15)  And  do  thou  also 
beware  of  him ;  for  he  is  very  insolent  against  our 
words. — (16)  At  my  first  defence,  no  one  was  with  16 
me,  but  they  all  forsook  me.     Let  not  this  be  reck- 
oned to  them.     (17)  But  my  Lord  stood  by  me,   17 
and  strengthened  me ;   tluit  by  me  the  preaching*^ 
might  be  fulfilled ;  and  [that]  all  the  Gentiles  miglit 
hear :  and  I  was  rescued  from  the  mouth  of  the  lion. 
(18)  And  my  Lord  will  rescue  me  from  every  evil  18 
work ;  and  will  give  me  life  in  his  heavenly  king- 
dom.— To  him  be  glory,  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen. 

Present  a  salutation  to  Priscilla  and  Aquila,  and 
to  the  household  of  Onesiphorus.  (20)  Erastus 
hath  stopped  at  Corinth  ;  and  Trophimus  I  left  sick 
at  the  city  of  Miletus.  (21)  E.\.ei't  thyself  to  come 
before  winter. — Eubulus  saluteth  thee,  andPudens, 
and  Linus,  and  Claudia,  and  all  the  brethren. — 
(22)  Our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah  be  with  thy  spirit.  22 
Grace  be  with  thee.     Amen. 

End  of  the  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy;   which  was  written 
from  Rome. 


14 
15 


19 
20 

21 


The  Epistle  of  Paul  to  Titus. 


6 


10 


11 


Paul,  a  servant  of  God,  and  a  legate  of  Jesus 
the  Messiah ;  according  to  the  faith  of  the  elect  of 
God,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  which  is  in 
the  fear  of  God,  (2)  concerning  the  hope  of  eternal 
life,  which  the  veracious  God  promised  before  the 
times  of  the  world ;»  (3)  and  in  due  time  he  hath 
manifested  his  word,  by  means  of  our  announce- 
ment, which  was  confided  to  me  by  the  command 
of  God  our  Life-giver;!'  (4)  to  Titus,  a  real  son 
after  the  common  faith : — Grace  and  peace  from 
God  our  Father,  and  from  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Mes- 
siah, our  Life-giver.  <= 

For  this  cause  left  I  thee  in  Crete,  that  thou 
mightest  regulate  the  things  deficient,  and  estabUsh 
elders'^  in  every  city,  as  I  directed  thee :  (6)  him, 
who  is  blameless,  who  is  the  husband  of  one  wife, 
and  hath  believing  children,  who  are  no  revellers, 

7  nor  ungovernable  in  sensuality.  (7)  For  an  elder^ 
ought  to  be  blameless,  as  the  steward  of  God ;  and 
not  be  self-willed,  nor  irascible,  nor  excessive  in 
wine,  nor  with  hands  swift  to  strike,  nor  a  lover  of 

8  base  gains.  (8)  But  he  should  be  a  lover  of  stran- 
gers, and  a  lover  of  good  [deeds],  and  be  sober, 
upright,  kind-hearted,  and  restraining  himself  from 

9  evil  passions;  (9)  and  studious  of  the  doctrine  of 
the  word  of  faith,  that  he  may  be  able  by  his 
wholesome  teaching  both  to  console,  and  to  rebuke 
them  that  are  contentious. — (10)  For  many  are  un- 
submissive, and  their  discourses  vain;  and  they 
mislead  the  minds  of  people,  especially  such  as  are 
of  the  circumcision.  (11)  The  mouth  of  these 
ought  to  be  stopped:  the}'  corrupt  many  families ;f 
and  they  teach  what  they  ought  not,  for  the  sake 

12  of  base  gains,     (12)  One  of  them,  a  prophets  of 
their  own,  said.  The  Cretans  are  always  menda- 

13  cious,  evil  beasts,  idle  bellies.     (13)  And  this  tes- 


Sy.  "jlcL^:, 

or,  Saviour. 
Gr.  (fuTr]p. 

or,  Saviour. 

Sy.  isQA^Zo 
]  ft  t  a  O 

'■  Sy.  "j  -  «  «  <"! 
Gr.  iifL<fKOifos. 


Sy.  houses. 
Sy-U^ 


392 


Sy. ")  »  .  m  n 


sy- 


"=  Gr.  Saviour. 


"^  Gr.  Saviour. 


TITUS,    II. 

timonj  is   true.     Therefore  chide  them  sharply ; 
that  they  may  be  sound  in  the  faith,  (14)  and  may  14 
not  throw  themselves  into  Jewish  fables,  and  into 
the  precepts  of  men  who  hate  the  truth.     (15)  For  15 
to  the  pure,  every  thing  is  pure;  but  to  them  who 
are  deliled  and  unbelieving,  nothing  is  pure;  but 
their  understanding  is  defiled,  and  their  conscience. 
(10)  And  they  profess  that  they  know  God,  but  in  16 
their  works  they  deny  him ;  and  they  are  odious, 
and  disobedient,  and  to  every  good  work  repro- 
bates. 

But  speak  thou  the  things  that  belong  to  whole-  II. 
some  doctrine.     (2)  And  teach  the  older  men^  to     2 
be  watchful  in  their  minds,  and  to  be  sober,  and  to 
be  pure,  and  to  be  sound  in  the  faith,  and  in  love, 
and  in  patience.     (3)  And  so  also  the  elder  worn-     3 
en,b  that  they  be   in  behavior   as  becometh  the 
fear  of  God ;  and  not  to  be  slanderers ;  and  not  to 
be  addicted  to  much  wine  ;  and  to  be  inculcators  of 
good  things,  (4)  making  the  younger  women  to  be     4 
modest,  to  love  their  husbands  and  their  children, 
(5)  to  be  chaste  and  holy,  and  to  take  good  care  of     5 
their  households,  and  to  be  obedient  to  their  hus- 
bands ;   so  that  no  one  may  reproach  the  word  of 
God. — (6)  And  likewise  exhort  young  men  to  be     6 
sober.     (7)  And  in  every  thing  show  thyself  a  pat-     7 
tern,  as  to  all  good  Avorks:  and  in  thy  teaching,  let 
thy  discourse  be  healthful,  (8)  such  as  is  sober  and     8 
uncorrupt;  and  let  no  one  despise  it:  so  that  he 
who  riseth  up  against  us,  may  be  ashamed,  seeing 
he  can  say  nothing  odious  against  us. — (9)  Let  ser- 
vants obey  their  masters  in  every  thing,  and  strive 
to   please   them,   and   not  contradict,    nor   pilfer; 
(10)  but  let  them  manifest  that  their  fidelity,  in  all  10 
respects,  is  good :   so  that  they  may  adorn  the  doc- 
trine of  God  our  Lifc-giver,c  in  all  things. — (11)  For  11 
the  all-vivifying  grace  of  God,  is  revealed  to  all 
men;  (12)  and  it  teacheth  us,  to  den}'-  ungodliness  12 
and  worldly  lusts,  and  to  live  in  this  world  in  so- 
briety, and  in  uprightness,  and  in  the  fear  of  God, 
(13)  looking  for  the  blessed  hope,  and  the  manifes-  13 
tation  of  the  glory  of  the  great  God,  and  our  Life- 
giver, «'  Jesus  the  Messiah;  (14)  who  gave  himself  14 
for  us,  that  he  might  recover  us  from  all  iniquity, 
and  purify  for  himself  a  new  people,  who  are  zcal- 


9 


TITUS,    III. 


393 


15  ous  in  good  works.  (15)  These  things  speak  thou, 
and  exl^ort,  and  inculcate,  with  all  authority  ;e  and 
let  no  one  despise  thee. 

Ill,  And  admonisli  them  to  be  submissive  and  obe- 
dient to  princes  and  potentates ;  and  that  they  be 

2  ready  for  every  good  work ;  (2)  and  that  they 
speak  ill  of  no  man ;  that  they  be  not  contentious, 
but  mild ;   and  that  in  every  thing  they  manifest 

3  benignity  towards  all  men. — (3)  For  we  also  were 
formerl}^  reckless,  and  disobedient,  and  erring,  and 
serving  divers  lusts,  and  living  in  malice  and  envy, 
and    were    hateful    and  also    hating  one    another. 

4  (1)  But  when  the  kindness  and  compassion  of  God 

5  our  Life-givera-  was  revealed,  (5)  not  by  works  of 
righteousness  which  we  had  done,  but  according 
to  his  mercy,  he  vivified''  us,  by  the  washing  of  the 
new  birth,  and  by  the  renovation  of  the  HolySpir- 

6  it,  (6)  which  he  shed  on  us  abundantly,  by  Jesus 

7  the  Messiah  our  Life-giver  :<^  (7)  that  we  might  be 
justified^  by  his  grace,   and  become  heirs  in  the 

8  hopeof  eternal  life. — (8)  Faithful  is  the  word:  and 
in  these  things,  I  would  have  thee  also  establish 
them  ;  so  that  they,  who  have  believed  in  God,  may 
be  careful  to  cultivate  good  works:  these  are  the 
things,  which   are  good,  and   profitable   to  men. 

9  (9)  But  foolish  questions,  and  stories  of  genealo- 
gies, and  the  disputes  and  contests  of  the  scribes, 
avoid :  for  there  is  no  profit  in  them,  and  they  are 

10  vain.     (10)  An  heretical*^  man,  after  thou  hast  lu- 
ll structed  him    once  and   again,    avoid:    (11)    and 

know  thou,  that  such  a  man  is  perverse,  and  sinful, 
and  self-condemned. 

12  When  I  shall  send  Artemas  to  thee,  or  Tychicus, 
strive  thou  to  come  to  me  at  Nicopolis ;  for  I  have 

13  purposed  to  winter  there.  (13)  As  for  Zenas  the 
scribe,  and  Apollos,  endeavor  to  help  them  well  on 

11  their  way,  that  they  may  want  nothing.  (11)  And 
let  our  people  learn  also  to  perform  good  works,  on 
occasions  of  emergency,  that  they  may  not  be  un- 

15  fruitful. — (15)  All  they  that  are  with  me  salute 
thee.  Salute  all  them  Avho  love  us  in  the  faith. — 
Grace  be  with  you  all.     Amen. 

End  of  the  Epistle  to  Titus  ;  which  was  written  from  ISico'p- 
olis,  and  was  sent  by  the  hands  of  Zenas  and  Apollos. 


Sy.  -rJDOa 


'  Gr.  Saviour. 
''  or,  saved. 

■=  Gr.  Saviour. 
^  Sy.  *D5jp 


eSy. 
Gr.  atpETiKos. 


•:.   ^QiOiXi^    Lq\->    sDQ\a£^-)    l-^Vl 


vf- 


The  Epistle  of  Paul  lo  Philemon. 


Sy. 


^  Sy.  heseechin^ 
I  beseech. 


Paul,  a  prisoner  of  Jesus  the  IMessiah,  and 
Timothy  a  brother ; — to  the  beloved  Philemon,  a 
laborer  with  ns,  (2)  and  to  our  beloved  Apphia,  and  2 
to  Archippus  a  laborer  with  us,  and  to  the  church 
in  thy  house. — (3)  Grace  be  with  you,  and  peace  3 
from  God  our  father,  and  from  our  Lord  Jesus  the 
Messiah. 

I  thank  my  God  always,  and  remember  thee  in     4 
my  prayers,  (5)  lo,  from  the  time  that  I  heard  of     5 
thy  faith,  and  of  the  love  thou  hast  towards  our 
Lord  Jesus,  and  towards  all  the  saints ;  (6)  that  there     6 
may  be  a  fellowships  of  thy  faith,  yielding  fruits  in 
works,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  all  the  good  things 
ye  possess  in  Jesus  the  Messiah.     (7)  For  we  have     7 
great  joy  and  consolation,  because  the  bowels  of  the 
saints  are  refreshed  by  thy  love. — (8)  Therefore  I     8 
might  have  great  freedom  in  the  Messiah,  to  enjoin 
upon  thee  the  things  that  are  right.     (9)  But  for     9 
love's  sake,  I  earnestly  beseech^  thee — even  I,  Paul, 
who  am  aged,  as  thou  knowest,  and  now  also  a 
prisoner  for  Jesus  the  Messiah.    (10)  I  beseech  thee  10 
for  my  son,  whom  I  had  begotten  in  my  bonds — for 
Onesimus;    (11)  from  whom  formerly  thou  hadst  11 
no  ])rofit,  but  now  very  profitable  will  he  be  both 
to  thee  and  to  me ;  and  whom  I  have  sent  to  thee. 

(12)  And  receive  thou  him,  as  one  begotten  by  me.  12 

(13)  For  I  was  desirous  to  retain  him  with  me,  that  13 
he  might  minister  to  me  in  thy  stead,  in  these  bonds 
for  the  gospel.     (14)  But  I  would  do  nothing  with-  14 
out  consulting  thee ;  lest  thy  benefit  should  be  as 

if  by  compulsion,  and  not  Avith  thy  pleasure. — (15)  15 
And,  perhaps,  also,  he  therefore  departed  from  thee 
for  a  season,  tliat  thou  mightest  retain  him  for  ever  ; 
(16)  hencefortli,  not  as  a  servant,  but  more  than  a  16 
servant,  a  brother  dear  to  me,  and  much  more  to 
thee,  both  in  the  flesh  and  in  our  Lord  ?     (17)  If  17 


HEBREWS,    I. 


895 


therefore  thou  art  in  fellowship'''  with  me,  receive  him 

18  as  one  of  mine.     (18)  And  if  he  hath  wronged  thee, 

19  or  oweth  thee  aught,  place  it  to  my  account.  (19) 
I,  Paul,  have  written  [it]  with  my  own  hand,  I  will 
repay  : — not  to  say  to  thee,  that  to  me  thou  owest 

20  thy  ownself  (20)  Yes,  my  brother,  let  me  be  re- 
freshed by  thee  in    our  Lord :    refresh   thou  my 

21  bowels  in  the  Messiah.  (21)  Being  confident  that 
thou  wilt  hearken  to  me,  I  have  written  to  thee : 
and  I  know  that  thou  wilt  do  more  than  I  say. 

22  And  herewith,  prepare  also  a  house  for  me  to 
lodge  in  ;  for  I  hope  that,  by  your  prayers,  I  shall 

23  be  given  to  you.     (23)  Epaphras,  a  fellow-captive 
21  with  me  in  Jesus  the  Messiah,  sal utetli  thee;  (24) 

and  Mark,  and  Aristarchus,  and  Demas,  and  Luke, 
25  my  coadjutors. — (25)  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
the  Messiah  be  with  your  spirit,  my  brethren. — 
Amen. 

End  of  ilie  Epistle  to  Philemon;    uiliich  was  wrillenfrom 
Rome,  and  was  sent  by  the  hands  of  Onesimus. 


Sy.  ]£i2.i 


.Q-» 


♦    V^^-^      ^CL^?      U^^ 

The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews. 


I.  In  many  ways,  and  many  forms,  God  anciently 
2  conversed  with  our  fathers,  by  the  prophets  :  (2) 
But  in  these  latter  days,  he  hath  conversed  with  us, 
by  his  Son ;  whom  he  hath  constituted  heir  of  all 
8  things,  and  by  whom  he  made  the  worlds  ;^  (3)  who 
is  the  splendor  of  his  glory,  and  the  image  of  him- 
self,*^ and  upholdeth  all  by  the  energy  of  his  word  ; 
and  by  himself  he  made  a  purgation  of  sins,  and 
sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high. 

4  (4)  And  he  is  altogether  superior  to  the  angels,  as 
he  hath  also  inherited  a  name  which  excelleth  theirs. 

5  (5)  For  to  which  of  the  angels  did  God  ever  say, 
Thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have  I  begotten  thee  ? 
And  again,  I  will  be  to  bim  a  Father,  and  he  shall 

6  be  to  me  a  Son  ?    (6)  And  again,  when  bringing  the 


Sy.  ]LQ^i. 
Sy.  ]kA^ 

of  Ms  Being. 


396 


HEBREWS,    II. 


Sy.  .jjOJ 


Sy-U- 


«  Gr,  salvation. 


Gr.  salvation. 


Sy. 


first  begotten  into  the  world,  he  said  :  Let  all  the 
angels  of  God  worship  him.     (7)  But  of  the  angels     7 
he  thus  said  : — Wiio    made    his    angels    a  \vind,c 
and  his  ministers  a  flaming  fire.    (8)  But  of  the  Son     8 
he  said  :  Thy  throne,  0  God,  is  for  ever  and  ever  ;  a 
righteous'^  sceptre  is  the  sceptre  of  thy  kingdom. 
(9)  Thou  hast  loved  rectitude,  and  hated  iniquity;     9 
therefore  God,  thy  God,  hath  anointed  thee  with  the 
oil  of  gladness  more  than  thy  associates.     (10)  And  10 
again,  Thou  hast  from  the  beginning  laid  the  foun- 
dations of  the  earth,  and  the  heavens  are  the  work  ' 
of  thy  hands:    (11)  they  will  pass  away,  but  thou  11 
endurest;   and  they  all,  like  a  robe,  wax  old;   (12)  12 
and  like  a  cloak,  thou  wilt  fold  them  up.     They 
will  be  changed ;  but  thou  wilt  be  as  thou  art,  and 
thy  years  will  not  be  finished. — (13)  And  to  which  13 
of  the  angels  did  he  ever  say  : — Sit  thou  at  my  right 
hand,  until  I  shall  place  thy  enemies  a  footstool 
under  thy  feet?      (14)  Are  they  not  all  spirits  of  1-i 
ministration,  who  are  sent  to  minister  on  account  of 
them  that  are  to  inherit  life  ?*' 


Therefore  we  ought  to  be  exceedingly  cautious, 
in  regard  to  what  we  have  heard,  lest  we  fall  away. 
(2)  For  if  the  word  uttered  by  the  medium  of  angels 
was  confirmed,  and  every  one  who  heard  it,  and 
transgressed  it,  received  a  just  retribution  ;  (3)  how 
shall  we  escape,  if  we  despise  the  things  which  are 
our  life, 'I  things  which  began  to  be  spoken  by  our 
Lord,  and  were  confirmed  to  us  by  them  who  heard 
from  him,  (4)  while  God  gave  testimony  concerning 
them,  by  signs  and  wonders,  and  by  various  mir- 
acles and  distributions  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which 
were  given  according  to  his  pleasure? — (5)  For  to 
the  angels  he  hath  not  subjected  the  world  to  come,'' 
of  which,  we  speak.  (6)  But  as  the  scripture  testi- 
fieth,  and  saith : — What  is  man,  that  thou  art  mindful 
of  him?  and  the  son  of  man,  that -thou  attendest  to 
him?  (7)  Thou  hast  depressed  him  somewhat 
lower  than  the  angels :  glory  and  honor  hast  thou 
put  on  his  head;  and  thou  hast  invested  him  with 
authority  over  the  work  of  thy  hand.  (8)  And  all 
things  hast  thou  subjected  under  his  feet.  And  in 
this  subjecting  of  all  things  to  him,  he  omitted  noth- 
ing, which  he  did  not  subject.  But  now,  we  do  not 
yet  see  all  things  subjected  to  him.     (9)  But  we  see 


II. 


HEBREWS,    III. 


397 


him,  who  was  depressed  somewhat  lower  than  the 
angels,  to  be  this  Jesus,  because  of  the  passion  of 
his  death;  and  glorj  and  honor  are  placed  on  his 
head  ;    for  God  himself,  in  his  grace,*  tasted  death 

10  for  all  men.  (10)  For  it  became  him,  by  whom  are 
all  things,  and  on  account  of  whom  are  all  things, 
and  [who]  bringeth  many  sons  unto  his  glory,   to 

11  perfect  the  prince  of  their  life'^  by  suffering.  (11) 
For  he  that  sanctifieth,  and  they  who  are  sanctified, 
are  all  of  one  [nature].    Therefore  he  is  not  ashamed 

12  to  call  them  brethren ;  (12)  as  he  saith,  I  will 
announce  thy  name  to  my  brethren ;  in  the  midst  of 

13  the  assembly,*^  I  will  j^raise  thee.  (13)  And  again, 
I  will  confide  in  him.  And  again.  Behold  me,  and 
the  children  whom  thou,  God,  hast  given  to  me. 

li  (1-1)  For  because  the  children  participated  in  flesh 
and  blood,  he  also,  in  like  manner,  took  part  in  the 
same ;  that,  by  his  death,  he  might  bring  to  naught 
him  who  held  the  dominion  of  death,  namely  Satan  ; 

15  (15)  and  might  release  them,  who,  through  fear  of 

16  death,  are  all  their  lives  subject  to  bondage.  (16) 
For  he  did  not  assume  [a  nature]  from  angels,  but 
he  assumed  [a  nature]  from  the  seed  of  Abraham. 

17  (17)  Wherefore  it  was  right,  that  he  should  be  in  all 
respects  like  his  brethren  ;  that  he  might  be  merci- 
ful, and  a  high  priest*'  faithful  in  the  things  of  God, 
and  might  make  expiation  for  the  sins  of  the  peo- 

18  pie.  (18)  For,  in  that  he  himself  hath  suffered,  and 
been  tempted,  he  is  able  to  succor  them  who  are 
tempted.  * 

III.  "Wherefore,  my  holy  brethren,  who  are  called  with 
a  calling  that  is  from  heaven,  consider  this  Legate^ 
and   High   Priest^  of    our  profession,   Jesus  the 

2  Messiah :    (2)   who  was  faithful  to  him  that  made 

3  him,  as  was  Moses  in  all  his  house.  (3)  For  much 
greater  is  the  glory  of  this  man,  than  that  of  Moses; 
just  as  the  glory  of  the  builder  of  a  house,  is  greater 

4  than  that  of  the  edifice.  (-4)  For  every  house  is 
built  by  some  man  ;  but  he  who  buildeth  all  things 

5  is  God.  (5)  And  Moses,  as  a  servant,  was  faithful 
in  all  the  house,  for  an  attestation  to  those  things 


Gr.  salvation. 


Sy.  Ua 


sy. 


»o> 


Sy.'U.tN, 


Sy._ 


%CiJ 


*  So  the  Jacobite  copies  read ;  but  the  Nestorian  copies  read,  But  he,  apart 
from  God,  tasted,  c|-c.  The  Greek  is,  orwj  X'^P'"'"'  ®'^'^  •  •  •  7«^o'''l'"ai,  <^c. :  but 
some  copies  have,    ontug  X^piV  ©sou,  &c. 


398 


HEBREWS,    IV. 


"=  Sy.  shoiving 

of  faces. 
^  Sy.  his  hope. 


Sy.  "llnxID 


Sy.  VQxO 


that  were  to  be  spoken  by  liim  :  (6)  but  tbe  ISIessiah,     6 
as  the  Sox,  [is]  over  his  own  house  ;  and  we  are  his 
house,  if  we  retain  unto  the  end  assurance,^  and  the 
triumph  of  hope  in  hira.'^     (7)  Because  the  Holy     7 
Spirit  hath  said :   To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice, 
(8)  harden  not  your  hearts  to  anger  him,  like  the     8 
provocators,  and  as  in  the  day  of  temptation  in  the 
wilderness,  (9)  when  your  fathers  tempted  me,  and     9 
proved,    [and]   saw  my  works  forty  years.      (10)  10 
Therefore  I  was  disgusted  with  that  generation,  and 
said : — This  is  a  people,  whose  heart  wanderetli,  and 
they  have  not  known  my  ways  :  (11)  so  that  I  swore  11 
in  my  wrath,  that  they  should  not  enter  into  my 
rest.      (12)    Beware,  therefore,  my  brethren,  lest  12 
there  be  in  any  of  you  an  evil  heart  that  believeth 
not,  and  ye  depart  from  the  living  God.     (13)  But  13 
examine  yourselves  all  the  days,  during  the  day 
which  is  called  to-day;    and  let  none  of  you  be 
hardened,  through  the  deceitfulness  of  sin.    (l-l)  For  14 
we  have  part  with  the  Messiah,  if  we  persevere  in 
this  firm  confidence,^  from  the  beginning  to  the 
end:  (15)  as  it  is  said,  To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  his  15 
voice,  harden  not  your  hearts,  to  anger  him.     (16)  16 
But  who  were  they  that  heard,  and  angered  him? 
It  was  not  all  they,  who  came  out  of  Egypt  under 
Moses.      (17)    And  with  whom  was  he  di.sgustcd  17 
forty  years,  but  with  those  who  sinned,  and  whose 
carcasses  fell  in  the  wilderness  ?     (18)  and  of  whom  18 
swore  he,  that  they  should  not  enter  into  his  rest, 
but  of  those  who  b^ieved  not  ?     (19)  So  we  see  that  19 
they  could  not  enter,  because  they  believed  not. — 
(IV.)  Let  us  fear,  therefore,  lest  while  there  is  a  IV. 
firm  promise^  of  entering  into  his  rest,  any  among 
you   should   be  feund  coming  short  of  entering. 
(2)    For  to  us  also  is  the  announcement,  as  well  as     2 
to  them :  but  the  word  they  heard  did  not  profit 
them,  because  it  was  not  mingled  with  the  fliith  of 
those  who  heard  it.     (3)  But  we,  who  have  believed,     3 
do  enter  into  rest.    But  as  he  said,  As  I  have  sworn 
in  my  wrath,  that  they  shall  not  enter  into  my  rest : 
for  lo,  the  works  of  God  existed  from  the  founda- 
tion of  the  world.     (4)  As  he  said  of  the  sabbath,     4 
God  rested  on  the  seventh  day  from  all  his  works. 
(5)  And  here  again,  he  said.  They  shall  not  enter     5 
into  my  rest.     (6)  Therefore,  because  there  was  a     6 
place,  whither  one  and  another  might  enter ;  and 


those  earlier  persons,  to  wliom  tlie  announcement 
was  made,  entered  not,  because  they  believed  not : — 

7  (7)  again  he  established  another  day,  a  long  time 
afterwards  ;  as  above  written,  that  David  said,  To- 
day, if  ye  will  hear   his  voice,  harden  not  your 

8  hearts.  (8)  For  if  Joshua,''  the  son  of  Nun,  had 
given  them  rest,  he  would  not  have  spoken  after- 

9  wards  of  another  day.  (9)  Therefore  it  is  estab- 
lished, that  the  people  of  God  are  to  have  a  sab- 

10  bath.c  (10)  For  he  who  had  entered  into  his  rest, 
hath  also  rested  from  his  works,  as  God  did  from 

11  his.  (11)  Let  us,  therefore,  strive  to  enter  into 
that  rest ;  lest  we  fall  short,  after  the  manner  of 

12  them  who  believed  not.  (12)  For  the  word  of  God 
is  living,  and  all-efiicient,  and  sharper  than  a  two- 
edged  sword,  and  entereth  even  to  the  severance  of 
the  soul  and  the  spirit,  and  of  the  joints  and  the 
marrow  and  the  bones,  and  judgeth  the  thoughts 

13  and  reasonings  of  the  heart :  (13)  neither  is  there 
any  creature,  which  is  concealed  from  before  him  ; 
but  every  thing  is  naked  and  manifest  before  his 
eyes,  to  whom  we  are  to  give  account. 

14  Seeing  then  that  we  have  a  great  High  Priest, <^ 
Jesus  the  Messiah,  the  son  of  God,  who  hath  as- 
cended to  heaven;  let  us  persevere  in  professing 

15  him.  (15)  For  we  have  not  a  high  priest,  who 
cannot  sympathize  with  our  infirmity ;  but  [one] 
who  was   tempted  in    all   respects  like  us,   aside 

16  from  sin. — (16)  Let  us,  therefore,  approach  with 
assurance^  to  the  throne  of  his  grace,  that  we  may 
obtain  mercy,  and  may  find  grace  for  assistance  in 

Y,  the  time  of  affliction. — (V.)  For  every  high  priest, ^ 
who  is  from  among  men,  is  established  over  the 
things  of  God,  in  behalf  of  men,  that  he  may  pre 

2  sent  the  offering  and  the  sacrifices-  for  sin  :  (2)  and 
he  can  humble  himself,  and  sympathize  with  the 
ignorant  and  the  erring,  because  he  also  is  clothed 

3  with  infirmity.  (3)  And,  therefore,  he  is  obliged  as 
for  the  people,  so  also  for  himself,  to  present  an  of- 

4  fering  for  his  sins. — (4)  And  no  one  taketh  this 
honor  on  himself,  but  he  who  is  called  of  God,  as 

5  Aaron  [was].  (5)  So  also  the  Messiah  did  not  ex- 
alt himself  to  become  a  High  Priest ;  but  He  [ap- 
pointed him]  who  said  to  him.  Thou  art  my  Son; 

6  this  day  have  I  begotten  thee.  (6)  As  he  said  also 
in  another  place  :  Thou  art  a  priest''  for  ever,  after 


Sy.  K\n  »  .- 

Jesus. 


or,  a  rest. 


Sy.   _^ 


Sy.  rvitli  oipen 
countenance. 
Sy.    ^^ 


Sy.  l^LoorD 


400 


HEBREWS,    VI. 


Sy.  IaX:^ 


^  Gr.  salvation. 


°  Sy.  a  time. 
f  Sy. 

f  Sy 


J5 


Sy.  jjja^ 

Sy. 
Uo;-..ki.^ 


Gr.  Touff  aifa.^ 
(pUTKfdivTa;. 


the  likeness  of  Melchisedec.    (7)  Likewise,  when  he     7 
was  clothed  iu  flesh,  he  presented  suiDplication  and 
entreaty  with  intense  invocation,  and  with  tears,  to 
him  who  was  able  to  resuscitate  him  from  death ; 
and  he  was  heard.     (8)  And  though  he  was  a  son,     8 
yet,  from  the  fear  and  the  sufferings  he  endured,  he 
learned  obedience.     (9)  And  thus  he  was  perfected     9 
and  became  the  cause^  of  eternal  life"^  to  all  them 
who  obey  him.     (10)  And  he  was  named  of  God,  10 
the  High  Priest  after  the  likeness  of  Alelchiscdec. 

Now,  concerning  this  person,   Melchisedec,  we  11 
have  much  discourse,  which  we  might  utter  ;  but  it 
is  difficult  to  explain  it,  because  ye  are  infirm  in 
your  hearing.     (12)  For  ye  ought  to  be  teachers,  12 
seeing  ye  have  been  long^  in  the  doctrine.   But  now, 
ye  need  to  learn  again  the  first  lines^  of  the  com- 
mencement?  of  the  oracles  of  God :  and  ye  have 
need  of  milk,  and  not  of  strong  food.    (13)  For  every  13 
one  whose  food  is  milk,  is  unversed  in  the  language 
of  righteousness,  because  he  is  a  child.     (1-1)  But  14 
strong  food  belongeth  to  the  mature  who,  being  in- 
vestigators, have  trained  their  faculties  to  discrimi- 
nate good  and  evil. — (YI.)  Therefore  let  us  leave  VL 
the  commencement^^  of  the  word  of  the  Messiah,  and 
let  us  proceed   to  the  completion.'^      Or  will   ye 
again  lay   another  foundation  for  the  repentance 
which  is  from  dead  works,  and  for  the  faith  in  God, 
(2)  and  for  the  doctrine  of  baptism,  and  for  the  lay-     2 
ing  on  of  a  hand,  and  for  the  resurrection  from  the 
dead,  and  for  the  eternal  judgment?     (3)  We  will     3 
do  this,  if  the  Lord  permit. — (4)  But  they  who  have     4 
once  descended  to  baptism,^  and  have  tasted  the  gift 
from  heaven,  and  have  received  the  Holy  Spirit, 
(5)  and  have  tasted  the  good  word  of  God,  and  the     5 
power  of  the  world  to  come, — (6)*   cannot  again     6 
sin,  and  a  second  time  be  renewed  to  repentance ; 
or  a  second  time  crucify  and  insult  the  Son  of  God. 
(7)  For  the  earth  that  drinketh   the  rain  which     7 
Cometh   often   upon   it,   and  produceth   the   herb 
that  is  of  use  to  those  for  whom  it  is  cultivated,  re- 
ceiveth  a  blessing  from  God.     (8)  But  if  it  should     8 
put  forth  thorns  and  briers,  it  would  have  reproba- 


*  The  Syriac  translation  suppo'ses  the  Greek  in  this  verse  to  be,  ifapavidsiv, 
xai  tfttXiv  dvaxaivi^eo'^ai,  &c. ;  instead  of  the  received  reading,  xai  'xapa'rrsdovTag, 
*aXiv  clvaxaivi^Siv,  &c. 


HEBREWS,    VII. 


401 


tion,  and  be  not  far  from  a  curse,  and  its  end  would 

9  be  a   burning.      (9)    But,  in  regard    to   you,   my 

brethren,  we  are  persuaded  better  tilings,  and  things 

10  pertaining  to  life,^  although  we  thus  speak.  (10) 
For  God  is  not  unrighteous,  to  forget  your  works, 
and  your  charity  which  ye  have  shown  in  his  name, 
in  that  ye  have  ministered  and  do  minister  to  the 

11  saints.  (11)  And  we  desire,  that  each  one  of  you 
may  show  this  same  activity,^  for  the  completion  of 

12  your  hope,  even  to  the  end:  (12)  and  that  ye  faint 
not ;  but  that  ye  be  emulators  of  them  who  by 
faith  and  patience  have  become  heirs  of  the  promise. 

13  (13)  For  when  God  made  the  promise  to  Abraham, 
because  there  was  none   greater  than   himself  by 

1-4  whom  he  could  swear,  he  swore  by  himself;  (14) 
aud  said  :  Blessing,  I  will  bless  thee,  and  multiplying 

15  I  will  multiply  thee.     (15)  And  so  he  was  patient, 

16  and  obtained  the  promise.  (16)  For  men  swear  by 
one  greater  than  themselves :  and  in  every  contro- 
versy that  occurs  among  them,  the  sure  termination 

17  of  it  is  by  an  oath.  (17)  Therefore,  God,  being 
abundantly  willing  to  show  to  the  heirs  of  the 
promise,  that  his  promising  was  irreversible,  bound 

18  it  up  in  an  oath  ;  (18)  so  that,  by  two  things  which 
change  not,  and  in  which  God  cannot  lie,  we,  who 
have  sought  refuge  in  him,  might  have  great  con- 
solation,  and  might  hold  fast  the  hope  promised  to 

19  us ;  (19)  which  is  to  us  as  an  anchor,  that  retaineth 
our  soul,  so  that  it  swerveth  not ;  and  it  entereth 

20  into  that  within  the  veil,  (20)  whither  Jesus  hath 
previously  entered  for  us,  and  hath  become  a  priest^ 
forever,  after  the  likeness  of Melchisedec? 

YII.  Now  this  Melchisedec  was  king  of  Salem,  ^^  a 
priest  of  the  most  high  God :  and  he  met  Abraham, 
when  returning  from  the  slaughter  of  the  kings; 

2  and  blessed  him.  (2)  And  to  him  Abraham  im- 
parted tithes  of  all  that  he  had  with  him.  More- 
over his  name  is  interpreted  king  of  righteousness ;'' 
and  again  [he  is  called]  King  of  Salem,  that  is  King 

3  of  Peace. '^  (3)  Of  whom  neither  his  father  nor  his 
mother  are  written  in  the  genealogies;  nor  the 
commencement  of  his  days,  nor  the  end  of  his  life  ; 
but,  after  the  likeness  of  the  Son  of  God,  his  priest- 

4  hood^i  remaineth  for  ever.^  (4)  And  consider  ye, 
how  great  he  was ;  to  whom  the  patriarch  Abraham 


■*  Gr.  salvation. 


Sy. 


^  Sy.  "j^loaD 

eSy. 

^  Sy.  .^.\V) 
I'Sy.  "InXlD 
<=Sy.     ]n\V^ 

^  Sy. 
(JlZotlDClO 

eSy.:^\s\ 


402 


HEBREWS,    VII. 


f  Sy. 
completeness. 


e  Sy.  SoVvV 
•"  Sy.  "|j^a£i 


'  Sy.  "iri^zL? 

^  Sy.  \^-^ 


9 


gave  tithes  and  first-fruits,     (5)  For  they  of  the  sons    5 
of  Levi  who  received  the  priesthood,  had  a  statute 
of  the  law,  that  they  should  take  tithes  from  the 
peojile ;  they  from  their  brethren,  because  they  also 
are  of  the  seed  of  Abraham.     (6)  But  this  man,  who     6 
is  not  enrolled  in  their  genealogies,  took  tithes  from 
Abraham ;  and  blessed  him  who  had  received  the 
pi'omise.     (7)    But  it  is  beyond  controversy,  that     7 
the  inferior  is  blessed  by  his  superior.     (8)  And     8 
here,  men  who  die,  receive  the  tithes ;  but  there, 
he  of  whom  the  scripture  testifieth  that  he  liveth. 

(9)  And  through  Abraham,  as  one  may  say,  even 
Levi   who   receiveth  tithes,    was    himself   tithed. 

(10)  For  he  was  yet  in  the  loins  of  his  father,  when  10 
he  met  Melchisedec.  (11)  If,  therefore,  perfection^  11 
had  been  by  means  of  the  priesthood  of  the  Levites, 

in  which  the  law  was  enjoined  on  the  i3eople ;  why 
was  another  priest  required,  who  should  stand  up 
after  the  likeness  of  Melchisedec  ?  For  it  should 
have  said.  He  shall  be  after  the  likeness  of  Aaron. 
(12)  But  as  there  is  a  change  in  the  priesthood,  so  12 
also  is  there  a  change  in  the  law.  (13)  For  he  of  13 
whom  these  things  were  spoken,  was  born  of  another 
tribe,  of  which  no  one  ever  ministered  at  the  altar. 
(14)  For  it  is  manifest  that  our  Lord  arose  from 
Judah,  from  a  tribe  of  which  Moses  said  nothing 
concerning  a  priesthood.  (15)  And  moreover  this 
is  further,  manifest,  from  his  saying  that  another 
priest  will  stand  up,  after  the  likeness  of  Melchise- 
dec, (10)  who  was  not  according  to  the  law  of  cor-  16 
poreal  injunctions,  but  according  to  the  energy  of 
an  indissoluble  life.  (17)  For  he  testified  of  him : 
Thou  art  a  priest  for  ever,?  after  the  likeness  of 
Melchisedec.  (18)  And  the  change  which  was 
made  in  the  first  statute,h  was  on  account  of  its  ini- 
potency,  and  because  their  was  no  utilitj'-  in  it, 
(19)  For  the  law  perfected  nothing;  but  in  the 
place  of  it  there  came  in  a  hope,  which  is  better  than 
it,  and  by  which  wc  draw  near  to  God. — (20)  And 
he  confirmed  it  to  us  by  an  oath.  (21)  For  they  21 
became  priests  without  an  oath  ;  but  this  man  by  an 
oath.  As  he  said  to  him  by  David :  The  Lord 
hath  sworn,  and  will  not  lie.  Thou  art  a  priest  for 
ever,  after  the  likeness  of  Melchisedec,  (22)  By  all  22 
this,  is  that  a  better  covenant'  of  which  Jesus  is  the 
.sponsor.'' — (23)  And  they  as  priests  were  numerous,  23 


14 


15 


17 

IS  18 


19 

20 


HEBREWS,    VIII. 


403 


because  thej  were  mortal,  and  were  not  permitted 

24  to  continue:  (24)  but  this  man,  because  lie  standeth 

25  up  for  ever,  his  priesthood  doth  not  pass  away :  (25) 
and  he  is  able  to  vivify ^  for  ever,  them  who  come 
to  God  by  him ;  for  he  always  liveth,  and  sendeth 

26  up  prayers  for  them. — (26)  For,  a  priest  like  to  him, 
was  also  suitable  for  us ;  one  pure,  and  without  evil 
and   without  stain  ;  one  separated  from  sins,  and 

27  exalted  higher  than  heaven ;  (27)  and  who  is  not 
obliged,  ^every  day,  like  the  [Aaronic]  high  priest, 
to  first  offer  sacrifices  for  his  own  sins,  and  then  for 
the  people  ;  for  this  he  did  once,  by  offering  up  him- 

28  self  (28)  For  the  law  constituted  feeble  men  priests ; 
but  the  word  of  the  oath,  which  was  subsequent  to 
the  law  [constituted]  the  Son  perfect  for  ever, 

VIII.  NoAv  the  sum"-  of  the  whole  is  this,  we  have  a 
High  Priest,  who  is  seated  on  the  right  hand  of  the 

2  throne  of  the  Majesty  in  heaven  :  (2)  And  he  is  the 
minister  of  the  sanctuary,  and  of  the  true  tabernacle, 

3  which  God  hath  pitched,  and  not  man.  (3)  For 
every  high  priest  is  established,  to  offer  oblations 
and  sacrifices ;  and  therefore,  it  was  proper  that  this 

4  one  should  also  have  something  to  offer.  (4)  And 
if  he  were  on  earth,  he  would  not  be  a  priest ;  be- 
cause there  are  priests  [there],  who  offer  oblations 

5  agreeably  to  the  law :  (5)  [namely]  they,  who 
minister  in  the  emblem  and  shadow  of  the  things 
in  heaven :  as  it  was  said  to  Moses,  when  he  was 
about  to  build  the  tabernacle.  See,  and  make  every 
thing  according  to  the"  pattern  which  was  showed 

6  thee  in  the  mount.  (6)  But  now,  Jesus  the  Mes- 
siah hath  received  a  ministry  Avhich  is  better  than 
that :  as  also  the  covenant, ^  of  which  he  is  made  the 
Mediator, <^  is  better,  and  is  given  with  better  prom- 

7  ises  than  the  former. — (7)  For,  if  the'  first  [cove- 
nant] had  been  faultless,  there  would  have  been  no 

8  place  for  this  second  [one].  (8)  For  he  chideth  them 
and  saith :  Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord, 
when  I  will  complete  with  the  family  of  the  house 
of  Israel,  and  with  the  family  of  the  house  of  Judah, 

9  a  new  covenant ;  (9)  not  like  the  covenant  which  I 
gave  to  their  ftxthers,  in  the  day  when  I  took  them 
by"  the  hand,  and  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of 
Egypt ;    [and]  because  they  continued  not  in  my 

10  covenant,  I  also  rejected  them,  saith  the  Lord.     (10) 


'  Gr.  save. 


Sy.]..^? 


Sy.  jn^A^j 
Sy.l^j^^ 


404 


HEBREWS,   IX. 


Sy.  give. 


Sy.]i!oa^ 


•>  Sy.  the  holy 
house. 


Sy.  "jjLlD 


Q_»U 


^  Sy.  ]JASd 


Sy. 


i^ 


=  Encr. 
tism. 


bap- 


Bat  this  is  the  covenant  Avhich  I  will  give  to  the 
family  of  the  house  of  Israel  after  those  days,  saith 
the  Lord :  I  will  put<^  my  law  in  their  minds,  and 
inscribe  it  on  their  hearts  ;  and  1  will  be  to  them  a 
God,  and  they  shall  be  to  me  a  people.     (11)  And  11 
one  shall  not  teach  his  fellow-citizen,  nor  his  brother, 
nor  say  :  Know  thou  the  Lord  :  because  the}^  shall 
all  know  me,  from  the  youngest  of  them  to  the  oldest. 
(12)  And  I  will  forgive  them  their  iniquity;  and  12 
their  sins  will  I  remember  no  more.      (18)  .In  that  13 
he  said  a  Nevv^  [Covenant],  he  made  the  first  old ; 
and  that  which  is  old  and  decaying,  is  near  to  dis- 
solution. 

Now,  under  the  first  [covenant],  there  were  or-  IX. 
dinances^^  of  ministration,  and  a  worldly  sanctuary. 
(2)  For  in  the  first  tabernacle  which  was  erected,     2 
there  was  the  candlestick,  and  the  table,  and  the 
bread  of  the  presence ;   and  this  was  called  the 
Sanctuary.^     (8)  But  the  inner  tabernacle,  which     3 
was  within  the  second  veil,  was  called  the  Holy  of 
Holies.     (4)  And  there  were  in  it  the  golden  censer,     4 
and  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  which  was  all  over- 
laid with  gold ;  and  in  it  were  the  golden  urn  which 
contained  the  manna,  and  the  rod  o£  Aaron  Avhich 
sprouted,  and  the  tables  of  the  covenant ;    (5)  and     5 
over  it  were  the  cherubim  of  glory,  which  over- 
shadowed the  mercy  seat.'^     But  there  is  not  time 
to  speak  particularly  of  each  of  the  things  which 
were  so  arranged.     (6)   And  into  the  outer  taber-     6 
nacle  the  priests,  at  all  times,  entered,  and  perform- 
ed their  ministration.     (7)    But  into  the  interior     7 
tabernacle,  once  a  yeviV  only,  the  high  priest  entered, 
with  the  blood  which  he  offered  for  himself  and  for 
the  sins  of  the  people.     (8)  x\nd  by  this  the  Holy     8 
Spirit  indicated,  that  the  way  to  the  holy  [places] 
was  not  yet  manifested,  so  long  as  the  first  taber- 
nacle was  standing:    (9)  and  it  was  a  symbol, 'J  for     9 
that  time,  during  which  oblation  and  sacrifices  were 
offered  that  could  not  make  perfect  the  conscience 
of  him  who  offered  them  :  (10)  but  [they  consisted]  10 
only  in  food  and  drink,  and  in  the  ablutions^  of 
divers  things ;  which  were  carnal  ordinances,  and 
were  set  up  until  the  time  of  a  reformation. — (11)  11 
But  the  Messiah  who  came,  was  a    High  Priest  of 
the  good  things  which  he  wrought :  and  he  entered 


HEBREWS,     IX. 


405 


into  the  great  and  perfect  tabernacle,  which  was  not 
made  with  hands  and  was  not  of  these  created  things. 

12  (12)  And  he  did  not  enter  with  the  blood  of  goats 
and  calves  ;  but  with  the  blood  of  himself,  he  enter- 
ed once  into  the  sanctuary,  and  obtained  eternal  re- 

13  demption.f  (13)  For  if  the  blood  of  goats  and  calves, 
with  the  ashes  of  a  heifer,  was  sprinkled  upon  them 
that  were  defiled,  and  sanctified  them  as  to  the 

11  purification  of  their  flesh  ;  (14)  then  how  much  more 
will  the  blood  of  the  Messiah,  who  by  the  eternal 
Spirit  offered  himself  without  blemish  to  God,  purge 
our  conscience"   from  dead  works,  so  that  we  may 

15  serve  the  living  God?  (15)  And  for  this  reason  he 
became  the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant,  ^  that  he 
might  by  his  death  be  redemption,'  to  them  who  had 
transgressed  the  first  covenant ;  so  that  they,  who 
are  called  to  the  eternal  inheritance,  might  receive 

16  the  promise. — (16)  For  where  there  is  a  testament,^  it 

17  indicateth  the  death  of  him  who  made  it.  (17)  For 
it  is  valid,  only  of  a  deceased  [person]  ;  because  it 

18  hath  no  use,  so  long  as  the  maker  of  it  liveth.  (18) 
Therefore  also  the  first  [covenant]  was  not  confirm- 

19  ed  without  blood.  (19)  For  when  the  whole  ordi- 
nancei  had  been  propounded  by  Moses  to  all  the 
people,  according  to  the  law ;  Moses  took  the  blood 
of  a  heifer,  and  water,  with  scarlet  wool  and  hyssop, 
and  sprinkled  upon  the  books  and  upon  all  the  peo- 

20  pie ;  (20)  and  said  to  them.  This  is  the  blood  of  the 

21  covenant  which  is  enjoined  by  God.  (21)  With 
that  blood  he  also  sprinkled  upon  the  tabernacle, 

22  and  upon  all  the  vessels  of  ministration :  (22)  be- 
cause every  thing,  according  to  the  law,  is  purified 
with  blood:  and  without  the  shedding  of  blood,  there 

23  is  no  remission.  (23)  For  it  was  necessary  that 
these,  the  emblems  of  heavenly  things,  should  be 
purified,  with  those  things;  but  the  heavenly  things 

24  themselves,  with  sacrifices  superior  to  them.  (24) 
For  the  Messiah  entered  not  into  the  sanctuary  made 
with  hands,  which  is  the  emblem"^  of  the  true 
[sanctuary] :  but  he  entered  into  heaven  itself  to 

25  appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us.  (25)  Neither 
[was  it  necessary],  that  he  should  ofter  himself  many 
times,   as  the  high  priest  entered  every  year  into 

26  the  sanctuary,  with  blood  not  his  own  :  (26)  other- 
wise, he  must  have  suffered  many  times,  since  the 
commencement  of  the  world ;  but  now  in  the  end 


Sy.  "[j_d5cl2D 


^  Sy.  ^5U 

"  Sy.  "^dA^? 
'  Sy.  ]j_o5a£) 

■=  Sy.  "UjZU?, 
zvhich  is  both 
a  covenant  and 
a  testament. 

'  Sy.  ]j^Cl^ 


Sy.  UqIdj 


406 


HEBREWS,    X. 


Sy.  ]Vn\v 


°  Gr.  salvation. 


Sy.  ^■■■>   .;''^ 


Sy.  I^A^j 
Sy.  »i_CDQi£L3 


of  the  world,"  he  hath  once  offered  himself  in  a 
self-sacrifice,  to  abolish  sin.      (27)  And,  as  it  is  ap-  27 
pointed  to  men,  that  thej  must  once  die,  and  after 
their  death  is  the  judgment;  (28)  so  also  the  Mes-  28 
siah  was  once  offered ;   and,  by  himself,  he  immola- 
ted the  sins  of  many :  and  a  second  time,  without 
sins,  will  he  appear  for  the  life°  of  them  who  ex- 
pect him. — (X.)  For  in  the  law  there  was  a  shadow  X. 
of  the  good  things  to  come ;  not  the  substance  of 
the  things  themselves.      Therefore,   although    the 
same  sacrifices  were  every  year  offered,  they  could 
never  perfect  those  who  offered  them.     (2)  For,  if    2 
they  had  perfected  them,  they  would  long  ago  have 
desisted  from  their  offerings;    because   their  con- 
science could  no  more  disquiet  them,    who  were 
once  purified,  on  account  of  their  sins.     (3)  But  in     3 
those  sacrifices,  they  every  year  recognized  their 
sins.     (4)  For  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  can-     4 
not  purge  away  sins.     (5)  Therefore,  when  entering     5 
the  world,  he  said  :  In  sacrifices  and  oblations,  thou 
hast  not  had  pleasure ;  but  thou  hast  clothed  me 
with  a  body.     (6)  And  holocausts  on  account  of    6 
sins,  thou  hast  not  asked,     (7)  Then  I  said :  Behold     7 
I  come,  as  it  is  written  of  me  in  the  beginning*  of 
the  books,  to  do  th}^  pleasure,  0  God.     (8)  He  first     8 
said  :   Sacrifices  and  oblations  and  holocausts  for 
sins,  which  were  offered  according  to  the  law,  thou 
desircdst  not ;    (9)  and  afterwards  he  said:  Behold 
I  come  to  do  thy  pleasure,  0  God :    hereby,   he 
abolished  the  former,  that  he  might  establish  the 
latter,     (10)  For  by  this  his  pleasure,  we  are  sancti-  10 
fied;  through  the  offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus  the 
Messiah  a  single  time.     (11)  For  every  high  priest  11 
who  stood  and  ministered  daily,  offered  again  and 
again  the  same  sacrifices,  which  never  were  sufficient 
to  purge  away  sins.  (12)  But  this  [Priest]  offered  one  12 
sacrifice  for  sins,  and  for  ever  sat  down  at  the  right 
hand  of  God;  (13)  and  thenceforth  waited,  until  his  13 
foes  should  be  placed  as  a  footstool  under  his  feet. 
(14)  For  by  one  offering,  he  hath  perfected  for  ever, 
them  who  are  sanctified   by  him.      (15)   And  the 
Holy  Spirit  also  testifieth  to  us,  by  saying  :  (16) 
This  is  the  covenant*'  which  I  will  give  them  after 
those  days,  saith  the  Lord  ;  I  will  put  my  law'=  into 
their  minds,  and  inscribe  it  on  their  hearts ;  (17) 
and  their  iniquity  and  their  sins,  I  will  not  remem- 


9 


14 
15 
16 


17 


18  ber  against  tliem.  (18)  ISTow,  where  there  is  a  re- 
mission of  sins,  there  is  no  offering  for  sin  demanded. 

19  We  have  therefore,  mj  brethren,  assurance'^  in 
entering  into  the  sanctuary,  bv  the  blood  of  Jesus, 

20  and  by  a  way  of  life,  (20)  which  he  hath  now  con- 
secrated for  us,  through  the  veil,  that  is  his  flesh. 

21  (21)  And  we  have  a  high  priest  over  the  house  of 

22  God.  (22)  Let  us,  therefore  draw  near,  with  a  true 
heart,  and  with  the  confidence  of  faith,  being 
sprinkled  as  to  our  hearts,  and  pure  from  an  evil 
conscience,  and  our  body  being  washed^  with  pure 

23  water.  (23)  And  let  us  persevere  in  the  profession 
of  our  hope,  and  not  waver;  for  he  is  faithful  who 

21  hath  made  the  promise  to  us.  (21)  And  let  us  look 
on  each  other,  for  the  excitement  of  love  and  good 

25  works.  (25)  And  let  us  not  forsake  our  meetings,^ 
as  is  the  custom  of  some ;  but  entreat  ye  one  an- 
other; and  the  more,  as  ye  see  that  day  draw  near. — 

26  (26)  For  if  a  man  sin,  voluntarily,  after  he  hath  re- 
ceived a  knowledge  of  the  truth,  there  is  no  longer  a 

27  sacrifice  which  maybe  offered  for  sins:  (27)  but  the 
fearful  judgment  impendeth,  and  the  zeal  of  fires 

28  that  consuraeth  the  adversaries.  (28)  For  if  he,  \Vho 
transgressed  the  law  of  Moses,  died  without  mercies, 

29  at  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses ;  (29)  how 
much  more,  think  ye,  will  he  receive  capital  punish- 
ment, who  hath  trodden  upon  the  Son  of  God,  and 
hath  accounted  the  blood  of  his  covenant,  by  which 
he  is  sanctified,  as  the  blood  of  all  men,  and  hath 

30  treated  the  Spirit  of  grace  with  contumely  ?  (30) 
For  we  know  him  who  hath  said,  Ketriljution  is 
mine ;  and  I  will  repay :  and  again.  The  Lord  will 

31  judge  his  people.     (31)  It  is  very  terrible,^  to  fall 

32  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God.— (32)  Therefore, 
recollect  ye  the  former  da3^s,  those  in  which  3'e  re- 
ceived baptism,!  and  endured  a  great  conflict  of  suf- 

33  ferings,  with  reproach  and  affliction ;  (33)  and  ye 
were  a  gazing  stock,  and  also  were  the  associates  of 

31  persons  who  endured  these  things :  (31)  and  ye  were 
grieved  for  those  who  were  imprisoned;  and  ye 
cheerfully  endured  the  plundering  of  your  goods, 
because  ye  knew  that  ye  had  a  possession  in  heaven, 

35  superior  and  not  transitory.  (35)  Therefore  cast  not 
away  j^our  assurance!^  which  is  to  have  a  great  re- 

36  ward.  (36)  For  ye  have  need  of  patience ;  that  ye  may 
do  the  pleasure  of  God,  and  may  receive  the  prom- 


^  Sy.  open  face. 


Sy. 

......  mV) 


Sy. 
_j-»QJLD 


5  Gr.  <j['upog 


'  Sy.  a  great 
fear. 

Gr. 


^  Sy.  openness 
of  cotinte- 
nance. 


408 


HEBREWS,    XI. 


Sy.  Ira. 


Sy.lA.^ 
or,  the  fiat. 


Sy.  ^Lm] 


*  Gr.  salvation. 


ise.     (37)    Because,  jet  a  little, — and  it  is  a  very  87 
little  time, — when  he  that  cometh,  will  come,  and 
will  not  delay.      (38)    Now  the  just  by  my  faith,  88 
will  live :  but  if  he  draw  back,  my  soul  will  not 
have  pleasure  in  him.     (39)  But  we  are  not  of  that  39 
drawing-back,  which  leadeth  to  perdition  ;  but  of 
that  faith,  which  maketh  us  possess  our  soul. 

Now  faith  is  the  persuasion^  of  the  things  that  XL 
are  in  hope,  as  if  they  were  in  act ;  and  [it  is]  the 
manifestness''  of  the  things  not  seen,     (2)    And     2 
for  it  the  ancients  are  well  testified  of — (3)  For  by     3 
faith,  we  understand  that  the  worlds  were  framed 
by  the  word<=  of  God  ;  and  that  things  seen,  origi- 
nated from  those  that  are  not  seen. — (4)  By  faith,     4 
Abel  offered  to  God  a  better  sacrifice  than  that  of 
Cain ;  and  on  account  of  it,  he  is  testified  of  that  he 
was  righteous,  and  God  bore  testimony  to  his  offer- 
ing; and  in  consequence  thereof,  though  dead  he 
yet  speaketh.     (5)  By  faith,  Enoch  was  translated,'^     5 
and  did  not  taste  death  ;  and  he  was  not  found,  be- 
cause God  had  translated  him :  for,  before  he  trans- 
lated him,    there  was   testimony  of  him,  that  he 
pleased  God.     (6)  But,  without  faith,  a  man  cannot     6 
please  God.     For  he  that  draweth  near  to  God,  must 
believe  his  existence,  and  that  he  will  recompense 
those  who  seek  him.     (7)  By  Faith  Noah,  when  he     7 
was  told  of  things  not  seen,  feared ;  and  he  made 
himself  an  ark,  for  the  life'^  of  his  household  ;  where- 
by he  condemned  the  world,  and  became  an  heir 
of  the  righteousness  which  is  by  faith. — (8)  By  faith     8 
Abraham,  when  he  was  called,  obej^ed,  and  depart- 
ed to  the  place  which  he  was  to  receive  for  an  in- 
heritance :    and  he  departed,  while  he  knew  not 
whither  he  was  going.     (9)  By  faith,  he  became  a     9 
resident  in  the  land  that  was  promised  him,  as  in  a 
foreign  land ;  and  abode  in  tents,  with  Isaac  and 
Jacob,  the  heirs  with  him   of  the  same  promise. 
(10)  For  he  looked  for  the  city  that  hath  a  founda-  10 
tion,  of  which  the  builder  and  maker  is  God.  (11)  By  11 
faith,  Sarah  also,  who  was  barren,  acquired  energy 
to  receive  seed ;  and,  out  of  the  time  of  her  years, 
she  brought  forth  ;  because  she  firmly  believed,  that 
he  was  faithful  who  had  promised  her.     (12)  There-  12 
fore,  from  one  man  failing  through  age,  numbers 
were  born,  like  the  stars  in  the  heavens,  and  like 


HEBREWS,    XI. 


409 


13 


U 


16 


17 

18 


19 


20 
21 


the  sand  on  the  shore  of  the  sea  which  is  innumer- 
able, (13)  All  these  died  in  faith,  and  received 
not  their  promise ;  but  they  saw  it  afar  off,  and  re- 
joiced ill  it;  and  they  confessed  that  they  were 
strangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  earth,  (l-l)  Now 
they  who  say  thus,  show  that  they  seek  a  city. 
15  (15)  But  if  they  had  been  seeking  that  city  from 
which  they  came  out,  they  had  opportunity  to  re- 
turn again  and  go  to  it.  (16)  But  now  it  is  manifest 
that  they  longed  for  a  better  [city]  than  that,  [name- 
ly,] for  that  which  is  in  heaven.  Therefore  God  did 
not  refuse  to  be  called  their  God ;  for  he  prepared 
for  them  the  city.  (17)  By  faith  Abraham,  in  his 
trial,  offered  up  Isaac;  and  he  laid  on  the  altar  his 
only  son,  whom  he  had  received  b}'  promise.  (18) 
For  it  had  been  said  to  him,  In  Isaac  shall  thy  seed 
be  called.  (19)  And  he  reasoned  with  himself,  that 
God  was  able  even  to  raise  [him]  from  the  dead : 
and  therefore,  in  the  similitude^  [of  a  resurrection], 
he  was  restoreds  to  him.  (20)  By  faith  in  what  was 
to  be,  Isaac  blessed  Jacob  and  Esau.  (21)  By  faith 
Jacob,  when  djang,  blessed  each  of  the  sons  of 
Joseph,  and  bowed  himself  on  the  top  of  his  staff. 

22  (22)  By  faith  Joseph,  when  dying,  was  mindful  of 
the  departure  of  the  children  of  Israel,  and  gave 

23  direction  concerning  his  bones. — (23)  By  faith  the 
parents  of  Moses,  after  he  was  born^  hid  him  three 
months ;  because  they  saw  he  was  a  goodly  child ; 
and  they  were  not  deterred  by  the  command  of  the 
king.  (24)  By  faith  Moses,  when  be  became  a  man, 
refused  to  be  called  the  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter. 

25  (25)  And  he  chose  to  be  in  affliction  with  the  peo- 
ple of  God,  and  not  to  live  luxuriously  in  sin  for  a 
short  season :  (26)  and  he  esteemed  the  reproach  of 
the  Messiah  a  greater  treasure  than  the  hoarded 
riches  of  Egypt ;  for  he  looked  upon  the  recompense 
of  reward.  (27)  By  faith,  he  left  Egypt,  and  was 
not  terrified  by  the  wrath  of  the  king;  and  he  con- 
tinued to  hope,  just  as  if  he  saw  the  invisible  God. 
(28)  By  faith,  they  kept''  the  passover,  and  the 
sprinkling  of  blood,  that  he  who  destroyed  the  first- 

29  born  migTit  not  approach  them.  (29)  By  faith,  they 
passed  the  Red  Sea,'  as  on  dry  land  ;  and  in  it  the 
Egyptians  were  swallowed  up,  when  they  dared  to 

80  enter  it.— (30)  By  flxith,  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell 
down,  when  they  had  been  encompassed  seven  days. 


24 


26 


27 


28 


Sy.  "jjALnrs 

Sy.  ^liiCTL.Z'j 


•»  Sy.  made. 


Sy. 


410 


HEBREWS,    XII. 


Sy.]J. 


•  or,  burflcns. 


^  or,  selves. 


36 


o/ 


(31)  By  faith  Kahab,  tte  harlot,  perished  not  with  31 
them  who  beheved  not,  when  she  received  the  spies 
in  peace.     (32)   What  more  shall  I  say  ?     For  I  32 
have  little  time  to  tell  of  Gideon,  and  of  Barak,  and 
of  Sampson,  and  of  Jephtha,  and  of  David,  and  of 
Samuel,  and  of  the  other  prophets  :    (33)  who,  by  33 
faith,  subdued  kingdoms,  and  wrought  righteous- 
ness, and  received  promises,  and  shut  the  mouths  of 
lions,  (3-1)  and  quenched  the  force^  of  lire,  and  were  31: 
rescued  from  the  edge  of  the  sword,  and  were  healed 
of  diseases,  and  became  strong  in  battle,  and  routed 
the  camps  of  enemies,   (35)  and  restored  to  women  35 
their  children,   by  a  resurrection  from  the  dead. 
And  some  died  under  tortures,  and  did  not  hbpe  to 
escape,  that  there  might  be  for  them  a  better  resur- 
rection ;    (36)  and  others  endured  raockings  and 
scourgings  ;  others  were  delivered  up  to  bonds  and 
prisons;  (37)  others  were  stoned  ;  others  were  saw- 
ed ;  others  died  by  the  edge  of  the  sword ;  others 
roamed  about  clothed  in  sheep  skins  and  goat  skins, 
and  were  needy,  and  afflicted,  and  agitated  ;   (38)  38 
persons  of  whom  the  world  was  not  worthy,  and 
yet  they  were  as  wanderers  in  the  desert,  and  in 
mountains,  and  in  caves,  and  in  caverns  of  the  earth. 
— (39)  And  all  these,  of  whose  faith  there  is  testimo-  39 
ny,  received  not  the  promise :  (1:0)  because  God  had  -10 
provided  the  aid  for  us;  so  that  without  us  tliey 
should  not  be  perfected. — (XII.)  Therefore  let  us  XII. 
also,  who  have  all  these  witnesses  surrounding  us 
like  clouds,  cast  from  us  all  encumbrances, '^  and  sin, 
which  is  always  prepared  for  us ;  and  let  us  run 
with  patience  the  race  that  is  appointed  for  us.    (2)     2 
And  let  us  look  on  Jesus,  who  hath  become  the 
commencement  and  the  completion  of  our  faith  ; 
who,  on  account  of  the  joy  there  was  for  him,  en- 
dui'ed  the  cross,  and  surrendered  himself  to  oppro- 
brium ;  and  is  seated  on  the  right  hand  of  the  throne 
of  God.  (3)  Behold,  therefore,  how  much  he  suffered     3 
from  sinners,  from  them  who  are  adversaries  of  their 
own  soul,b  i^jjr^t  ye  may  not  be  discouraged,  nor 
your  soul  become  remiss. 

Ye  have  not  yet  come  unto  blood,  in  the  contest     4 
against  sin.      (5)  And  ye  have  forgotten  the  moni-     5 
tion,  which  saith  to  you,  as  to  children,  ^ly  son,  dis- 
regard not  the  chastening  of  the  Lord  ;  nor  let  thy 
soul  faint,  when  thou  art  rebuked  by  him.     (6)  For,     6 


HEBREWS,    XII. 


411 


9 


11 


whom   the  Lord  loveth,  he  chasteneth ;    and  'he 
scourgeth  those  sons,  for  whom  he  hath  kiud  re- 

7  gards.  (7)  Therefore  endure  je  the  chastisement ; 
because  God  is  dealing  with  you  as  with  sons. 
For  what  son  is  there,  whom  his  father  chasteneth 

8  not?  (8)  But  if  ye  are  without  that  chastisement, 
with  which  every  one  is  chastened,  ye  are  become 
strangers  and  not  sons.  (9)  And  if  our  fathers  of 
the  flesh  chastened  us,  and  we  revered  them,  how 
much  more  ought  we  to  be  submissive  to  our  spirit- 

10  ual  fathers, c*  and  live?  (10)  For  the}^  chastened  us 
for  a  short  time,  according  to  their  pleasure  ;  but 
God,  for  our  advantage,  that  we  may  become  par- 
takers of  his  holiness.  (11)  Now  all  chastisement, 
in  the  time  of  it,  is  not  accounted  a  matter  of  joy, 
but  of  grief:  yet,  afterwards,  it  yieldeth  the  fruits 
of  peace  and  righteousness  to  them  who  are  exer- 

12  cised  by  it. — (12)     Wherefore,  strengthen  ye  your 

13  relaxed  hands,  and  your  tottering  knees :  (13)  and 
make  straight  paths  for  yoiw  feet,  that  the  limb  which 
is  lame  may  not  be  wrenched,  but  may  be  healed. 
(1-4)  Follow  after  peace  with  every  man  ;  and  after 
holiness,  without  which  a  man  will  not  see  our 
Lord.  (l5)  And  be  careful,  lest  any  be  found  among 
you  destitute  of  the  grace  of  God ;  or  lest  some  root 
of  bitterness  shoot  forth  germs,  and  trouble  you  ; 

16  and  thereby  many  be  defiled  :  (16)  or  lest  any  one 
be  found  among  j'ou  a  fornicator  ;  or  a  heedless  one 
like  Esau,  who  for  one  mess  of  food,  sold  his  primo- 
geniture. (17)  For  ye  know  that,  afterwards  when 
he  wished  to  inherit  the  blessing,  he  was  rejected  ; 
for  he  found  not  a  place  for  repentance,  although 
he  sought  it  with  tears. — (18)  For  ye  have  not 
come  to  the  fire  that  burned,  and  the  tangible 
[mount] ;  nor  to  the  darkness  and  obscurity  and 

19  tempest;  (19)  nor  to  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  and 
the  voice  of  words,  which  they  who  heard,  entreated 
that  it  might  no  more  be  spoken  to  them  ;  (20)  for 
they  could  not  endure  what  was  commanded.  And 
even  a  beast,  if  it  approached  the  mountain,  was  to 
be  stoned.  (21)  And  so  terrible  was  the  sight,  that 
Moses  said,  I  fear  and  tremble.  (22)  But  ye  have 
come  to  Mount  Zion,  and  to  the  city  of  the  living 


11 


15 


17 


18 


20 


21 

22 


■=  Gr.  Tw  'K'arpt 


*  This,  undoubtedly,  is  a  spurious  reading;  for  it  conflicts  with  the  Greek,  and 
disagrees  with  the.  context. 


412 


HEBREWS,    XIII. 


'  Sy.  ]L^ 

«  Sy.  U^^ 


»  or,  in  you. 


or,  discourse 
of  God. 


God,  tlic  Jerusalem  that  is  in  heaven  ;  and  to  the 
assemblies  of  myriads   of  angels;  (23)  and  to  the  23 
church'^  of  the  first-born,  who  are  enrolled  in  heaven ; 
and  to  God  the  judge  of  all ;  and  to  the  spirits  of 
the  just,  who  are  perfected;    (2J:)  and  to  Jesus,  the  24 
Mediator^  of  the  new  covenant;  and  to  the  sprink- 
ling of  his  blood,  which  speaketh  better  than  that 
of  Abel. — (25)  Beware,  therefore,  lest  ye  refuse  [to  25 
hear]  him  who  speaketh  with  you.      For  if  they 
escaped  not,  who  refused  [to  hear]  him  who  spake 
with  them  on  the  earth,  how  much  more  shall  we 
not,  if  we  refuse  [to  hear]  him  who  speaketh  with 
us  from  heaven  ?     (26)  AVhose  voice  [then]  shook  26 
the  earth;  but  now  he  hath  promised,  and  said,  yet 
again  once  more,  I  will  shake  not  the  earth  ordy, 
but  also  heaven.      (27)  And  this  his  expression,  27 
Once  more,  indicateth  the  mutation  of  the  things 
that  are  shaken,  because  they  are  fabricated  ;  that 
the  things  which  will  not  be  shaken,  may  remain. 
(28)  Since,  therefore,  we  have  received  a  kingdom  28 
that  is  unshaken,  let  us  grasp  the  grace  whereby 
we  may  serve  and  please  God,  with  reverence  and 
fear.     (29)  For  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire.  29 

Let  love  for  the  brethren  dwell  among=i  you.  XIII. 
(2)  And  forget    not   kindness   to   strangers ;    for     2 
thereby  some  have  been  privileged  to  entertain  an- 
gels, unawares.    (3)  And  remember  those  in  bonds,     3 
as  if  ye  were    bound   with  them :    and    recollect 
those  in  affliction,  as  being  yourselves  clothed  in 
flesh. — (4)  Marriage  is  honorable  in  all ;  and  their    4 
bed  undefiled :  but  whoremongers  and  adulterers, 
God  Avill  judge.      (5)   Let  not  your   mind   love     5 
money;  but  let  what  ye  have,  satisfy  you.     For 
the  Lord  himself  hath  said,  I  will  never  leave  thee, 
nor  slacken  the  hand  towards  thee.     (6)  And  it     6 
belongeth  to  us,  to  say  confidently,  My  Lord  is  my 
aider,  I  will  not  fear.     What  can  man  do  to  me  ? 
(7)  Remember  your  guides,''  who  have  spoken  to     7 
you  godly  discourse  ;<5  examine  the  issue  of  their 
course,  and  imitate  their  faith. — (8)  Jesus  the  Mes-     8 
siah  is  the  same,  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever. 
(9)  Be  not  led  away  by  strange  and  variable  doc-     9 
trines.     For  it  is  a  good  thing,  that  we  strengthen 
our  hearts  with  grace,  and  not  with  meats;    for 
those  have  not  been  benefited,  who  walked  in  them. 


HEBREWS,    XIII. 


413 


10  (10)  And  we  have  an  altar,  of  which  thej  who 
minister  in  the  tabernacle  have  no  right  to  eat. 

11  (11)  For  the  flesh  of  those  animals,  whose  blood 
the  high  priest  brought  into  the  sanctuary  for  sins, 

12  Avas  burned  without  the  camp.  (12)  For  this  rea- 
son, Jesus  also,  that  he  might  sanctify  his  people 

13  with  his  blood,  suffered  without  the  city.  (13) 
Therefore,  let  us  also  go  forth  to  him,  without  the 

14  camp,  clothed  with  his  reproach  :  (14)  (for  we  have 
here  no  abiding  city ;  but  we  expect  one  that  is 

15  future  :)  (15)  and  through  him,  let  us  at  all  times 
offer  to  God  the  sacrifices  of  praise,  that  is,  the 
fruits   of    lips   which   give   thanks   to   his   name. 

16  (16)  And  forget  not  commiseration  and  communi- 
cation with  the  poor ;  for  with  such  sacrifices  a 

17  man  pleaseth  God.  (17)  Confide  in  your  guides, ** 
and  hearken  to  them  ;  for  they  watch  for  your 
souls,  as  men  who  must  give  an  account  of  you, 
that  they  may  do  this  with  joy  and  not  with  an- 
guish ;    for  that  would  not  be  profitable  to  you. 

18  — (18)  Pray  ye  for  us  ;  for  we  trust  we  have  a  good 
consciousness,  that  in  all  things  we  desire  to  con- 

19  duct  ourselves  well.  (19)  Especially  do  I  request 
you  to  do  this,  that  I  may  return  to  you  speedily. 

20  Ma}^  the  God  of  peace, — who  brought  up  from 
the  dead  the  great  Shepherd  of  the  flock,  by  the 
blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant,  namely  Jesus 

21  the  Messiah,  our  Lord, — (21)  make  you  perfect  in 
every  good  work,  that  ye  may  do  his  pleasure ; 
and  himself  operate  in  you  that  which  is  pleasing 
in  his  sight,  through  Jesus  the  Messiah ;  to  whom 
be  glory,  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 

22  And  I  beseech  you,  my  brethren,  that  ye  be  pa- 
tient under  this  word  of  exhortation  ;  for  it  is  in 

23  few  words  I  have  written  to  you. — (23)  And  know 
ye,  that  our  brother  Timothy  is  set  at  liberty  :  and 
if  he  come  soon,   I,   with  him,   shall  see  you. — 

24  (24)  Salute  all  your  guides,  ^  and  all  the  saints. 

25  All  they  of  Italy  salute  you. — (25)  Grace  be  with 
you  all.     Amen. 

End  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebretvs ;  which  was  written  from 
Italy  of  Rome ;  and  was  sent  by  the  hands  of  Timothy. 


Sy. 


^QOjJ, 


^plD 


Sy. 


r^ 


or,  peace. 


in  his  doitiirs. 


-J  Sy. 


.'^'"^ 


James,  a  servant  of  God,  and  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
the  Messiah ; — to  the  twelve  tribes  dispersed  among 
the  Gentiles; — greetings 

.  Let  it  be  all  joy  to  you,  my  brethren,  when  ye 
enter  into  many  and  various  trials,  (3)  For  ye 
know,  that  the  trial  of  [your]  faith,  maketh  you 
possess  patience.  (4)  And  let  patience  have  its 
perfect  work,  so  that  ye  may  be  complete  and  per- 
fect, and  may  lack  nothing. — (5)  And  if  any  of  you 
lacketh  wisdom,  let  him  ask  [it]  of  God,  who  giv- 
eth  to  all  freely,''  and  reproacheth  not ;  and  it  Avill 
be  given  him.  (6)  But  let  him  ask  in  faith,  not 
hesitating:  he  who  hesitateth  is  like  the  waves  of 
the  sea,  which  the  Avind  agitateth.  (7)  And  let  not 
that  man  expect  to  receive  any  thing  of  the  Lord, 
(8)  who  is  hesitating  in  his  mind,  and  unstable  in 
all  his  ways. — (9)  And  let  the  depressed  brother 
rejoice,  in  his  elevation ;  (10)  and  the  rich,  in  his 
depression ;  because,  like  tlie  flower  of  an  herb,  so 
he  passeth.  away.  (11)  For  the  sun  riseth  in  its 
heat,  and  dricth  up  the  herb ;  and  its  flower  fall- 
eth,  and  the  beauty  of  its  ap])carancc  pcrisheth ; 
so  also  the  rich  man  withereth  in  his  ways.<= — 
(12)  Blessed  is  the  man  who  endureth  teraiDtations ;  12 
.so  that  when  he  is  proved  he  may  receive  a  crown 
of  life,  which  God  hath  promised  to  them  that  love 
him.  (13)  Let  no  one  when  he  is  tempted,  say,  I  13 
am  tempted  of  God  :  for  God  is  not  tempted  Avitli 
evils,'!  nor  doth  he  tempt  any  man.  (14)  But  every 
man  is  tempted  by  his  own  lust;  and  he  lusteth, 
and  is  drawn  away.  (15)  And  this  [his]  lust  con- 
ceiveth,  and  bringeth  forth  sin ;  and  sin,  when  ma- 
ture, bringeth  forth  death. — (16)  Do  not  err,  my 
beloved  brethren.  (17)  Every  good  and  perfect  17 
gift  Cometh  down  from  above,  from  the  Father  of 


6 


8 

9 

10 

11 


14 


15 
16 


JAMES,   II. 


415 


20 
21 


22 


24 
25 


26 


lights,  Avith  wliom  is  no  mutation,  not  even  tlie 

18  shadow  of  change.  (18)  He  saw  fit,  and  begat  ns 
bj  the  word  of  truth ;  that  we  might  be  the  first- 

19  fruits  of  his  creatures. — (19)  And  be  ye,  my  be- 
loved brethren,  every  one  of  you,  swift  to  hear,  and 
slow  to  speak;  and  slow  to  wrath:  (20)  for  the 
wrath  of  man  worketh  not  the  righteousness  of 
God,  (21)  Wherefore, '  remove  far  from  you  all 
impurity,  and  the  abundance  of  wickedness ;  and, 
with  meekness,  receive  the  word  that  is  implanted 
in  our  nature,  which  is  able  to  vivify*^  these  your 
souls. 

But  be  ye  doers  of  the  word,  and  not  hearers 
23  only ;  and  do  not  deceive  yourselves.  (23)  For  if 
any  man  shall  be  a  hearer  of  the  word,  and  not  a 
doer  of  it,  he  will  be  like  one  who  seeth  his  face  in 
a  mirror  :  (24)  for  he  seeth  himself,  and  passeth  on, 
and  forgetteth  what  a  man  he  was.  (25)  But  every 
one  that  looketh  upon  the  perfect  law  of  liberty, 
and  abideth  in  it,  is  not  a  hearer  of  something  to 
be  forgotten,  but  a  doer  of  the  things ;  and  he  will 
be  blessed  in  his  work.  (26)  And  if  any  one 
thinketh  that  he  worshippeth  God,  and  doth  not 
restrain  his  tongue,  but  his  heart  deceiveth  him ; 
27  his  worship  is  vain.  (27)  For  the  worship^  that  is 
pure  and  holy  before  God  the  Father,  is  this :  to 
visit  the  fatherless  and  the  widows  in  their  afflic- 
tion, and  that  one  keep  himself  unspotted  from  the 
world, — (II.)  My  brethren,  hold  ye  not  the  faith 
of  the  glory  ^  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  with 
a  respect  to  persons.'  (2)  For  if  there  come  into 
your  assembly  a  man  with  rings  of  gold  or  splen- 
did garments,  and  there  come  in  a  poor  man  in 
sordid  garments ;  (3)  and  ye  show  respect  to  him 
who  is  clothed  in  splendid  garments,  and  say  to 
him,  Seat  thyself  here,  conspicuously  ;  while  to  the 
poor  man,  ye  say,  Stand  thou  there,  or  sit  thou 
here  before  my  footstool ;  (4)  are  ye  not  divided 
among  yourselves,  and  become  expositors  of  evil 
thoughts  ?  (5)  Hear,  my  beloved  brethren  ;  hath 
not  God  chosen  the  poor  of  the  world,  but  the  rich 
in  faith,  to  be  heirs  in  the  kingdom  which  God 
hath  promised  to  them  that  love  him  ?  (6)  But 
ye  have  despised  the  poor  man.  Do  not  rich  men 
exalt  themselves  over  you,  and  drag  3^ou  before  the 
tribunals  ?     (7)  Do  they  not  revile  that   worthy 


II 


6 


Gr, 


f  Sv. 


or,  the  glo- 
rious faith. 


416 


JAMES,    III. 


Sy. 


"  Gr.  save. 


I) 


Sy.  »05j|iD 


name,  which  is  invoked  upon  you?    (8)  And  if  in     8 
this  ye  fulfill  the  law  of  God,  as  it  is  written,  Thou 
shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as  thyself,  ye  will  do  well : 
(9)  but  if  ye  have  respect  of  persons,  ye  commit  sin  ;     9 
and  ye  are  convicted  by  tlie  law,  as  transgressors  of 
the  law.     (10)  For  he  that  shall  keep  the  Avhole  10 
law,  and  yet  fail  in  one  [precept],  is  obnoxious''  to 
the  whole  law.     (11)  For  he  who  said.  Thou  shalt  11 
not    commit  adultery,    said  also.  Thou  shalt    not 
kill.     If  then  thou  commit  no  adultery,  but  thou 
killest,  thou  hast  become  a  transgressor  of  the  law. 
— (12)  So  speak  ye,  and  so  act,  as  persons  that  are  12 
to  be  judged  by  the   law  of  liberty.      (18)  For  13 
judgment  without  mercy  shall  be  on  him,  who  hath 
practised  no  mercy :  by  mercy,  ye  will  be  raised 
above  judgment. 

What  is  the  use,  my  brethren,  if  a  man  say,  I  14 
have  faith  ;  and  he  hath  no  works  ?    can  his  faith 
vivify^  him?     (15)  Or  if  a  brother  or  sister  be  na-  15 
ked,  and  destitute  of  daily  food,  (16)  and  one  of  16 
you  say  to  them,  Go  in  peace,  warm  3-ourselves,  and 
be  full ;  and  ye  give  them  not  the  necessaries  of 
the  body,  what  is  the  use?      (17)  So  also  faith  17 
alone,  without  works,  is  dead. — (18)   For  a  man  18 
may  say.   Thou   hast  faith,  and  I   have   works ; 
show  to  me  thy  faith  that  is  without  works ;  and^I 
will  sliow  to  thee,  my  faith  by  my  works.     (19)  19 
Thou  believest  that  there  is  one  God ;  thou  dost 
well ;  the  demons  also  believe,  and  tremble.     (20)  20 
Wouldst  thou  know,  0  frail  man,  that  faith  with- 
out works  is  dead?     (21)  Abraham  our  father,  was  21 
not  he  justified  by  works,  in  offering  his  son  Isaac 
upon   the   altar?     (22)  Seest  thou,  that  his  faith  22 
aided  his  works ;  and  that  by  the  works  his  faith 
was  rendered  complete?     (23)  And  the  scripture  23 
was  fulfilled,  which  saith:    Abraham  believed  in 
God,  and  it  was  accounted  to  him  for  righteousness, 
and  he  was  called  the  Friend  of  God. — (24)  Thou  24 
seest,  that  by  works  a  man  is  justified'^,  and  not  by 
faith  alone.     (25)  So  also  Rahab,  the  harlot,  was  25 
not  she  justified  by  works,  when  she  entertained 
the  spies,  and  sent  them   forth  by  another  way  ? 
(26)  As  the  body  without  the  spirit,  is  dead ;  so  26 
faith  without  works,  is  dead  also. 

Let  there  not  be  many  teachers  among  you,  my  III. 


JAMES,    IV. 


417 


brethren  ;  but  know  ye,  that  we*  are  obnoxious  to 

2  a  severer  judgment.  (2)  For  we  all  offend  in  many 
things.  Whoever  ofFendeth  not  in  discourse,  is  a 
perfect  man,  who  can  also  keep  his  whole  body  in 

3  subjection.  (3)  Behold,  we  put  bridles  into  the 
mouth  of  horses,  that  they  may  obey  us ;  and  we 

4  turn  about  their  whole  body.  (4)  Huge  ships  also, 
when  strong  winds  drive  them,  are  turned  about  by 
a  small  timber,  to  Avhat  place  the  pleasure  of  the 

5  pilot  looketh.  (5)  So  likewise  the  tongue  is  a 
small  member,  and  it  exalteth  itself.     Also  a  little 

6  fire  inflame th  large  forests.  (6)  Now  the  tongue 
is  a  fire,  and  the  world  of  sin  is  like  a  forest.  And 
this  tongue,  which  is  one  among  our  members, 
marreth  our  whole  body ;  and  it  inflameth  the 
series  of  our  generations  that  roll  on  like  a  wheel ; 

7  and  it  is  itself  on  fire.  (7)  For  all  natures''  of  beasts 
and  birds  and  reptiles,  of  the  sea  or  land,  are  sub- 

8  jugated  by  the  nature^  of  man.  (8)  But  the  tongue 
hath  no  one  been  able  to  tame :  it  is  an  evil  thing, 

9  not  coercible,  and  full  of  deadly  poison.  (9)  For 
with  it,  we  bless  the  Lord  and  Father;  and  with  it 
we  curse  men,  who  were  made  in  the  image  of  God : 

10  (10)  and  from  the  same  mouth,  proceed  curses  and 
blessings.     My  brethren,  these  things  ought  not  to 

11  be  so.    (11)  Can  there  flow  from  the  same  fountain, 

12  sweet  waters  and  bitter?  (12)  Or  can  the  fig- tree, 
my  brethren,  bear  olives  ?  or  the  vine,  figs  ?  So  also 

13  salt  waters  cannot  be  made  sweet. — (13)  Who  is 
wise  and  instructed  among  you  ?  Let  him  show  his 
works  in  praiseworthy  actions,  with  modest  wisdom. 

14  (14)  But  if  bitter  envy  be  in  you,  or  contention  in 
your  hearts,  exalt  not  yourselves  against  the  truth,' 

15  and  lie  not.  (15)  For  this  wisdom  cometh  not 
down  from  above;    but  is  earthly,  and  from  the 

16  devices'^  of  the  soul,  and  from  demons.  (16)  For 
where  envy  and  contention  are,  there  also  is  confu- 

17  sion,  and  every  thing  wrong.  (17)  But  the  wisdom 
which  is  from  above,  is  pure,  and  full  of  peace,  and 
mild,  and  submissive,  and  full  of  compassion  and  of 
good  fruits,  and  without  partiality,  and  without  re- 

18  spect  of  persons.  (18)  And  the  fruits  of  righteous- 
ness are  sown  in  stillness,  by  them  who  make 
peace, 

lY.     Whence  is  it,  that  there  are  among  you  fightings 


i.  e.  the  teach- 


Sy.  lixD 


Sy.  ]n  •Q-^j 


418 


Sy.  it  Cometh 
not  into  your 
hand. 


or,  superior. 


Gr.  save. 


JAMES,    V. 

and  broils  ?  Is  it  not  from  the  lusts,  which  war  in 
your  members  ?     (2)  Ye  coVct,  and   possess  not ;     2 
and  ye  kill,  and  envy,  and  effect  nothing!^ :  and  ye 
fight  and  make  attacks  ;  and  ye  have  not,  because 
ye  ask  not.     (3)  Ye  ask,  and  receive  not ;  because     3 
ye  ask  wickedly,  that  je  may  pamper  your  lusts. 
(4)  Ye  adulterers,  know  ye  not,  that  the  love  of  the     4 
world  is  hostility  towards  God  ?     He  therefore  who 
chooseth  to  be  a  lover  of  this  world,  is  the  enemy 
of  God.     (5)  Or  think  ye,  that  the  scripture  hath     5 
vainly  said :  The  spirit  dwelling  in  us  lusteth  with 
envy  ?     (6)  But  our  Lord  hath   given  us   more^     6 
grace.     Therefore  he  said :.  The  Lord  humbleth  the 
lofty,  and  giveth  grace  to  the  lowly.     (7)  Subject     7 
yourselves  therefore  to  God ;  and  stand  firm  against 
Satan,  and  he  will  flee  from  you.     (8)  Draw  nigh     8 
to  God,  and  he  will  draw  nigh  to  you.     Cleanse 
your  hands,  ye  sinners :  sanctify  your  hearts,  ye 
divided  in   mind.      (9)    Humble   yourselves,  and     9 
mourn  :  let  your  laughter  be  turned  into  mourning, 
and  your  joy  into  grief     (10)  Humble  yourselves  10 
before  the  Lord,  and  he  will  exalt  you. — (11)  Speak  11 
not  against  each  other,  m}^  brethren ;  for  he  that 
speaketh  against  his  brother,  or  judgeth  his  brother,' 
speaketh  against  the  law,   and  judgeth  the   law. 
And  if  thou  judgest  the  law,  thou  art  not  a  doer 
of  the  law,  but  its  judge.     (12)  There  is  one  Law-  12 
giver  and  Judge,  who  can  make  alive, <=  and  [can] 
destro}?" :  J)ut  who  art  thou,  that  thou  judgest  thy 
neighbor  ? 

But  what  shall  we  say  of  those,  who  say  :  To-day  13 
or  to-morrow  we  will  go  to  such  or  such  a  cit}^,  and 
will  abide  there  a  year ;  and  we  will  traffic,  and 
get  gain  ?     (14)  And  they  know  not  what  will  be  14 
to-morrow :  for  what  is  our  life,  but  an  exhalation 
that  is  seen  a  little  while,  and  then  vanisheth  and  is 
gone?      (15)  AVhereas   they  should  say:     If  the  15 
Lord  please,  and  we  live,  we  will  do  this  or  that. 
(16)    They   glory   in  their  vaunting.      All   such  16 
glorying  is  evil.     (17)  He  that  knowcth  the  good,  17 
and  doeth  it  not,  to  him  is  sin. — (V.)  0  ye  rich  V. 
ones,  wail  and  weep,  on  account  of  the  miseries 
that  are  coming  upon  you.     (2)  For  your  wealth  is     2 
spoiled  and  putrid ;  and  your  garments  are  moth- 
eaten  :  (3)  and  your  gold  and  your  silver  have  con-     3 
tracted  rust ;  and  the  rust  of  them  will  be  testimony 


JAMES,    V. 


419 


against  you ;  and  it  will  eat  your  flesh.     Ye  have 
heaped  up  a  fire  to  you  against  the  latter  days. 

4  (4)  Behold,  the  wages  of  the  laborers  who  have 
reaped  your  ground,  which  ye  have  wrongfully  re- 
tained, crie^h  out ;  and  the  clamor  .of  the  reapers 
hath  entered   the   ears   of  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth. 

5  (5)  For  ye  have  lived  in  pleasure  on  the  earth,  and 
revelled,  and  feasted  your  bodies  as  in  a  day  of 

6  slaughter.  (6)  Ye  have  condemned  and  slain  the 
just,  and  none  resisted  you. 

7  But,  my  brethren,  be  ye  patient  until  the  advent 
of  the  Lord ;  like  the  husbandman,  who  waiteth  for 
the  precious  fruits  of  his  ground,  and  is  patient  as 
to  them,  until  he  receive  the  early  and  the  latter 

8  rain.  (8)  So  also  be  ye  patient,  and  fortif)^  j^our 
hearts  ;  for  the  advent  of  our  Lord  draweth  nigh. 

9  — (9)  ]3e  not  querulous^  one  against  another,  my 
brethren,  lest  ye  be  judged:  for  lo,  the  judgment 

10  standeth  before  the  door.  (10)  For  patience  in 
your  afflictions,  my  brethren,  take  to  3'ou  the  ex- 
ample of  the  prophets,  who  spoke  in  the  name  of 

11  the  Lord.  (11)  For  lo,  we  ascribe  blessedness  to 
them  Avho  have  borne  suffering.  Ye  have  heard  of 
the  patience  of  Job ;  and  ye  have  seen  the  result 
which  the  Lord  wrought  for  him  :  for  the  Lord  is 
merciful  and  compassionate. 

12  But  above  all  things,  my  brethren,  swear  ye  not ; 
neither  by  heaven,  nor  by  the  earth,  nor  by  any 
other  oath :  but  let  your  language  be  yes,  yes,  and 
no,  no  ;  lest  ye  become  obnoxious  to  judgment. 

13  And  if  any  of  you  shall  be  in  affliction,  let  him 
pray ;    or  if  he  be  joyous,   let  him  sing  psalms. 

14  (14)  And  if  one  is  sick,  let  him  call  for  the  elders'' 
of  the  church;  and  let  them  pray  for"  him,  and 
anoint  him  with  oil  in  the  name  of  our  Lord : 

15  (15)  and  the  prayer  of  faith  will  heal  him  who  is 
sick,  and  our  Lord  will  raise  him  np ;  and  if  sins 
have  been  committed  by  him,  they  will  be  forgiven 

16  him.  (16)  And  confess  je  your  fiiults  one  to  another, 
and  pray  ye  one  for  another,  that  ye  may  be  heal- 
ed ;  for  great  is  the  efficacy  of  the  prayer  which  a 

17  righteous  man  prayeth.  (17)  Elijah  also  was  a 
man  of  sensations  like  us,  and  he  prayed  that  rain 
might  not  descend  upon  the  earth ;  and  it  descended 

18  not,  for  three  years  and  six  months.  (18)  And 
again  he  prayed,  and  the  heavens  gave  rain,  and 


Gr. 


■Sy. 
or,  ore?'  him. 


420 


1   PETER,    L 


^  Gr.  save. 


the  earth  gave  forth  its  fruits. — (19)  My  brethren,  19 
if  one  of  you  err  from  the  way  of  truth,  and  any 
one   convert   him  from  his  error;    (20)    let  him  20 
know,  that  he  who  turneth  the  sinner  from  the 
error  of  his  way,  will  resuscitate"^    his,  soul   from 
death,  and  will  cover  the  multitude  of  his  sins. 

E7id  of  the  Epistle  of  James,  the  Legate. 


•>  ^]n     .al,kL»     "U^  iNff     SDO-rJ^I     V-\J\     *^oL 


^ 


Aoaiii : 
The  Epistle  of  Peter,  the  Legate ;  Simon  Cephas. 


i5) 


''  Gr.  salvation. 


"  Gr.  salvation. 


Peter,  a  legate  of  Jesus  the  Messiah, — to  the  I. 
elect  and  sojourners,  who  are  dispersed  in  Pontus, 
and  in  Galatia,  and  in  Cappadocia,  and  in  Asia,  and 
in  Bithynia, — (2)  to  them  who  have  been  chosen,  2 
by  the  foreknowledge  of  God  the  Father,  through 
sauctification  of  the  Spirit,  unto  the  obedience  and 
the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  the  Messiah : 
— May  grace  and  peace  abound  towards  you. 

Blessed  be  God,  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the     3 
Messiah,  who  in  his  great  mercy  hath  begotten^  us 
anew,  by  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the 
Messiah,  to  the  hope  of  life,  (4)  and  to  an  inherit-     4 
ance  incorruptible,  undefiled,  and  unfading,  which 
is  prepared  for  you  in  heaven ;  (5)  while  ye  are     5 
kept,  by  the  power  of  God  and  by  faith,  for  the 
life''  that  is  prepared  and  will  be  revealed  in  the 
last  times  ;  (6)  wherein  ye  will  rejoice  for  ever,  not-     6 
withstanding  ye  at  the  present  time  are  pressed  a 
little,  by  the  various  trials  that  pass   over  you ; 
(7)  so  that  the  proof  of  your  faith  may  appear  more     7 
precious  than  refined  gold  that  is  tested  b}''  fire, 
unto  glory  and  honor  and  praise,  at  the  manifesta- 
tion of  Jesus  the  Messiah:  (8)  whom  having  not     8 
seen,  ye  love  ;  and  in  the  faith  of  whom  ye  rejoice, 
with  joy  that  is  glorious  and  inettable,   (9)  that  ye     9 
may    receive   the    recompense  of  your  faith,    the 
lifc^  of  your  souls ;  (10)  that  life  [uamely],  about  10 


1  PETER,    I. 


421 


11 


12 


13 


which  the  prophets  inquired,  when  they  were 
prophesying  of  the  grace  which  was  to  be  given 
to  you.  (11)  And  they  searched  for  the  time, 
which  the  Spirit  of  the  Messiah  dwelling  in  them 
did  show  and  testify,  when  the  sufferings  of  the 
Messiah  were  to  occur,  and  his  subsequent  glory. 
(12)  And  it  was  revealed  to  them,  [in  regard  to] 
all  they  were  searching,  that,  <i  not  for  themselves 
were  they  inquiring,  but  for  us  they  were  prophe- 
sying  of  those  things,  which  are  now  manifested  to 
you  by  means  of  the  things  we  have  announced  to 
you,  by  the  Holy  Spirit  sent  from  heaven;  which 
things  the  angels  also  desire  to  look  into. 

Wherefore,  gird  up  the  loins  of  your  minds,  and 
be  awake  perfectly,  and  wait  for  the  joy,  which  will 
come  to  you  at  the  revelation  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the 

14  Messiah,  (14)  as  obedient  children  :  and  be  ye  not 
conversant   again    with   those   former   lusts,   Avith 

15  which  ye  lusted  when  without  knowledge. '  (15)  But 
be  ye  holy  in  all  your  conduct,  as  he  is  holy  who 

IG  hath  called  you.     (16)  Because  it  is  written :  Be 

17  ye  holy,  even  as  I  am  holy.  (17)  And  if  so  be  ye 
call  on  the  Father, — with  whom  is  no  respect  of 
persons,  and  who  judgeth  every  one  according  to  his 
deeds, — pass  the  time  of  your  sojournment  with 

18  fear ;  (18)  since  ye  know,  that  neither  with  perish- 
able silver,  nor  with  gold,  ye  were  redeemed  from 
your  vain  doings,  which  ye  had  by  tradition  from 

19  your  fathers;  (19)  but  with  the  precious  blood  of 
that  Lamb  in  which  is  no  spot  nor  blemish,  namely, 
the  Messiah  :  (20)  who  was  predestined  to  this,  be- 
fore the  foundation  of  the  world  ;  and  was  mani- 
fested at  the  termination  of  the  times,  for  your 
sakes ;  (21)  who,  by  means  of  him,  have  believed 
in  God,  who  raised  him  from  the  dead  and  confer- 
red glory  on  him  ;  that  your  faith  and  hope  might 

22  be  in  God,  (22)  while  your  minds  became  sancti- 
fied, by  obedience  to  the  truth  ;  and  ye  be  full  of 
love,  without  respect  of  persons,  so  that  ye  love  one 
another  out  of  a  pure  and  perfect  heart ;  (23)  like 
persons  born  again,  ^  not  of  seed  that  perislieth,  but 
of  that  which  doth  not  perish,  by  the  living  word 
of  God,  who  abideth  for  ever.  (24)  Because  all 
flesh  is  as  grass,  and  all  its  beauty  like  the  flower 
of  the  field.  The  grass  drieth  up,  and  the  flower 
withereth  away ;  (25)  but  the  word  of  our   God 


20 


21 


23 


24 


25 


or,  because. 


Sy. 


>5i 


422 


Sy.  U^? 


Sy.  ^^  t^nim 


1   PETER,    11. 

abideth  for  ever :  and  this  is  the  word  that  is  an- 
nounced to  you. — (II.)  Therefore,  cease  ye  from  all  II. 
malice,  and  all  guile,  and  hypocrisy,  and  envy,  and 
backbiting.     (2)  And  be  like  infant  children  ;   and     2 
crave  the  word,  as  being  the  pure  spiritual  milk 
by  which  ye  are  nourished  up  to  life ;  (3)  if  ye     3 
have  tasted  and  seen  that  the  Lord  is  good  :    (4)  to     4 
whom  ye  have  come,  because  he  is  a  living  stone, 
rejected  indeed  by  men,  but  with  God  elect  and  pre- 
cious.   (5)  And  ye  also,  as  living  stones,  are  builded    5 
and  become  spiritual  temples,  and  holy  priests,  for 
the  offering  of  spiritual  sacrifices,^  acceptable  before 
God,  through  Jesus  the  Messiah.     (6)  For  it  is  said     6 
in  the  scripture,  Behold,  in  Zion  I  lay  a  chosen 
and  precious  stone,  for  the  head  of  the  corner; 
and  whoever  believeth  in  him,  will  not  be  ashamed. 
(7)  On  you  therefore  who    believe,  is  this  honor     7 
conferred :  but  to  them  who  believe  not,  (8)  he  is  a    8 
stone  of  stumbling  and  a  rock  of  offence.     And 
they  stumble  at  it,  because  they  believe  not  the 
word :  whereto  they  were  appointed.^    (9)  But  ye     9 
are  an  elect  race,  officiating  as  priests  of  the  king- 
dom ;    a  holy  people,  a  redeemed  congregation ; 
that  ye  should  proclaim  the  praises  of  him  who 
called  you  out  of  darkness  to  his  precious  light : 
(10)  who  formerly  were  not  accounted  a  people,  but  10 
now  are  the  people  of  God ;  and  also,  there  were 
[once]  no  mercies   on  you,  but  now  mercies  are 
poured  out  upon  you. 

My  beloved,  I  entreat  you  as  strangers  and  pil-  11 
grims,   separate  yourselves  from   all  lusts  of  the 
body;  for  they  war  against  the  souL     (12)  And  12 
let  your  behavior  be  decorous  before  all  men ;  so 
that  they  who  utter  evil  speeches  against  you,  may 
see  your  good  actions,  and  may  praise  God  in  the 
day  of  trial. — (13)  And  be  ye  submissive  to  all  the  13 
sons  of  men,  for  God's  sake ; — to  kings,  on  account 
of  their  authority ;  (14)  and  to  judges,  because  they  14 
are  sent  by  him  for  the  punishment  of  offenders, 
and  for  the  praise  of  them  that  do  well.     (15)  For  15 
so  is  the  pleasure  of  God,  that  by  your  good  deeds 
ye  may  stop  the  mouth  of  the  foolish,  who  know 
not  God:  (16)  as  free  men,  yet  not  like  men  who  16 
make  their  freedom  a  cloak  for  their  wickedness, 
but  as  the  servants  of  God.     (17)  Honor  all  men;  17 
love  your  brethren  ;   fear  God ;  and  honor  kings. 


1    PETER,    III. 


423 


18 


19 


And  those  among  you  who  are  servants,  be  sub- 
ject to  your  masters,'^  with  reverence  ;  not  only  to 
the  good  and  gentle,  but  also  to  the  harsh  and 
morose.  (19)  For  there  is  favor  before  God  for 
them  who,  for  the  sake  of  a  good  conscience,  en- 
dure  sorrows  that  come  upon  them  wrongfully. 

20  (20)  But  they  who  endure  afflictions  on  account  of 
their  offences,  what  praise  have  they  ?  But  if,  when 
ye  do  well,  they  vex  you,  and  ye  endure  it ;  then 

21  great  is  3^our  praise  Avith  God.  (21)  For  unto  this 
were  ye  called ;  because  the  Messiah  also  died  for 
us,  and  left  us  this  pattern,  that  ye  should  walk  in 

22  his  steps.     (22)  He  did  no  sin  ;  neither  was  guile 

23  found  in  his  mouth.  (23)  AVhen  he  was  reviled, 
he  reviled  not ;  and  he  suffered  and  threatened  not, 
but  committed  his  cause  to  the  Judge  of  righteous- 

21  ness.  (24)  And  he  took  away^  all  our  sins,  and, 
in  his  body,  lifted  them  to  the  cross  ;  that  we,  when 
dead  to  sin,  might  live  by  his  righteousness:  for 

25  by  his  wounds,  ye  are  healed.  (25)  For  ye,  [once] 
went  astray,  like  sheep ;  but  ye  have  now  returned 
to  the  Shepherd  and  Curator^  of  your  souls. 

III.  So  also  3^e  wives,  be  ye  subject  to  your  hus 
bands;  that,  by  your  pleasing  behavior,  ye  may 
gain  over,  without  difficulty,  those  who  obey  not 

2  the  word,  (2)  when  they  see,  that  ye  conduct  your- 

3  selves  with  revei'ence  and  chastity.  (3)  And  adorn 
not  yourselves  with  the  external  ornaments  of  curls 
of  the  hair,  or  of  golden  trinkets,  or  of  costly  gar- 

4  ments.  (4)  But  adorn  yourselves  in  the  hidden 
person  of  the  heart,  ^^  with  a  mild  and  uncorrupted 
spirit,  an  ornament  that  is  precious  before  God. 

5  (5)  For  so  also  the  holy  women  of  old,  who  trusted 
in  God,  adorned  themselves,  and  were  subject  to 
their  husbands :  (6)  just  as  Sarah  was  subject  to 
Abraham,  and  called  him,  My  lord :  whose  daugh- 
ters ye  are,  by  good  works,  while  ye  are  not  terri- 
fied by  any  fear. — (7)  And  ye  husbands,  likewise, 
dwell  with  your  wives  according  to  knowledge ; 
and  hold  them  in  honor,  as  the  feebler  vessels  ;  be- 
cause they  also  will  inherit  with  you  the  gift  of 
eternal  life :  and  let  not  your  prayers  be  hindered. 

The  summing  up,^  is,  that  ye  all  be  in  harmony, 
that  ye  be  sympathetic  with  them  who  suffer,  and 
affectionate  one  to  another,  and  be  merciful  and 


6 


Sy.  to  your 
lords. 


Sy.  ^\rL* 


Sy. 

Gr.  siti(ixo<T(og. 


Sy-kA? 


Sy.  ]Vn\r)  « 


424 


1    PETER,    IV. 


"  some :  the. 


^  Sy. 

«  Gr.  saved. 
'  Gr.  saved. 
e  Sy. 


10 


11 


kind.     (9)  And  that  ye  recompense  to  no  one  evil     9 
for  evil,  neither  raihng  for  raihng;  but,  in  contra- 
riety to  these,  that  ye  bless:  for  to  this  were  ye 
called,  that  ye  might  inherit  a  blessing.    (10)  There- 
fore, whoever  chooseth  life,  and  desireth  to  see  good 
days,  let  him  keep  his  tongue  from  evil,  and  his 
lips  that  they  speak  no  guile;    (11)  let  him  turn 
away  from  evil,  and  do  good ;  let  him  seek  peace, 
and  follow  after  it.     (12)  BecaUvSe  the  eyes  of  the  12 
Lord  are  upon  the  righteous,  and  his  ears  [ready] 
to  hear  them :  but  the  face  of  the  Lord  is  against 
the  wicked.     (13)  And  who  will  do  you  harm,  if  13 
ye  are  zealous  of  good  works?      (14)    But  if  it  14 
should  occur,  that  ye  suffer  on  account  of  righteous- 
ness, happy  are  ye.     And  be  not  terrified,  by  those 
who  would  terrify  you,  nor  be  agitated:  (15)  but  15 
sanctify  the  Lord  the  Messiah,  in  your  hearts. 

And  be  ye  ready  for  a  vindication,  before  every 
one  who  demandeth  of  you  an  account  of  the  hope 
of  your<^  faith,  (16)  in  meekness  and  respect,  as  16 
having  a  good  conscience ;  so  that  they  who  speak 
against  you  as  bad  men,  may  be  ashamed,  for  hav- 
ing calumniated  your  good  conduct  in  the  Messiah. 

(17)  For  it  is  profitable  to  you,  that  ye  suffer  evil  17 
while  ye  do  good  deeds,  if  this  should  be  the  pleas- 
ure of  God ;    and   not,   while  ye  do  evil   deeds. 

(18)  For  the  Messiah  also  once  died  for  our  sins,  18 
the  righteous  for  sinners;  that  he  might  bring  you 

to  God.     And  he  died  in  body,  but  lived  in  spirit. 

(19)  And  he  preached  to  those  souls,  which  were  19 
detained  in  Hades, ^^  (20)  which  were  formerly  dis-  20 
obedient,  in  the  days  of  Noah,  when  the  long  suf- 
fering of  God  commanded  an  ark  to  be  made,  in 
hope  of  their  repentance  ;  and  eight  souls  only  en- 
tered into  it,  and  were  kept  alive"  in  the  waters. 
(21)  And  ye  also,  by  a  like  figure,  are  made  alive*'  21 
by  baptism,?  (not  when  ye  wash  your  bodies  from 
filth,  but  when  ye  confess  God  with  a  pure  con- 
science,) and  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  the  Mes- 
siah ;  (22)  who  is  taken  up  to  heaven,  and  is  on  22 
the  riglit  hand  of  God,  and  angels,  and  authorities, 
and  ])()wcrs,  arc  subject  to  him. — (IV.)  If  then  the  IV. 
Messiah  hath  suffered  for  you  in  the  flesh,  do  ye 
also  arm  yourselves  with  the  same  mind :  for  every 
one  that  is  dead  in  his  body,  hath  ceased  from  all 
sins,  (2)    that  he  may  no  longer  be  alive  to  the  2 


1    PETER,    IV. 


425 


10 


11 


lusts  of  men,  while  lie  is  in  the  body,  but  [only]  to 

3  do  the  pleasure  of  God.  (3)  For  the  time  that  is 
past  was  enough,  when  ye  wrought  the  pleasure  of 
the  profane,  =^  in  dissoluteness,  and  in  ebriet}^,  and 
in  lasciviousness,  and  in  revelling,  and  in  the  wor- 

4  ship  of  demons.  (4)  And  lo,  they  now  wonder, 
and  reproach  you,  because  ye  revel  not  with  them 

5  in  the  same  former  dissoluteness ;  (5)  who  must 
give  account  to  God,  who  is  to  judge  the  living  and 

6  the  dead.  (6)  For  on  this  account  the  announce- 
ment is  made  also  to  the  dead,  that  they  may  be 
judged  as  persons  in  the  flesh,  and  may  live  accord- 
ing to  God  in  the  spirit. 

7  But  the  end  of  all  things  approacheth:  therefore 

8  be  sober,  and  be  wakeful  for  praj'er.  (8)  And 
above  all  things,  have  fervent  love  one  towards 

9  another;  for  love  covereth  a  multitude  of  sins.  (9) 
And  be  ye  com])assionate  to  strangers,  without 
murmuring.  (10)  And  let  each  of  you  minister  to 
his  associates  the  gift  which  he  hath  received  from 
God ;  as  being  good  stewards  of  the  manifold  grace 
of  God.  (11)  Whoever  will  speak,  let  him  speak 
as  the  word  of  God :  and  whoever  will  minister,'' — 
as  of  the  ability  that  God  hath  given  him :  so  that 
in  all  ye  do,  God  may  be  glorified,  through  Jesus 
the  Messiah  ;  to  whom  belongeth  glory,  and  honor. 
for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 

My  beloved,  be  not  dismayed  at  the  trials  that 
befall  you,  as  if  some  strange  thing  had  come  upon 
you ;  for  these  things  are  for  your  probation.  (13) 
But  rejoice,  that  ye  participate  in  the  sufferings  of 
the  Messiah,  that  so  ye  may  also  rejoice  and  exult 

14  at  the  revelation  of  his  glory.  (14)  And  if  ye  are 
reproached  on  account  of  the  name  of  the  Messiah, 
happy  are  ye :  for  the  glorious  Spirit  of  God  resteth 

15  upon  you.     (15)  Only  let  none  of  3'ou  suffer,  as  a 

16  murderer,  or  as  a  thief,  or  as  an  evil-doer.  (16) 
But  if  he  suffer  as  a  Christian,''  let  him  not  be 
ashamed;  but  let  him  glorify  God  on  account  of 

17  this  name.  (17)  For  it  is  the  time  when  judgment 
will  commence  v/ith  the  house  of  God:  and  if  it 
commence  with  us,  what  will  be  the  end  of  those 

18  who  obey  not  the  gospel  of  God?  (18)  x\nd  if  the 
righteous  scarcely  liveth,*^  where  will  the  ungodly 

19  and  the  sinner  be  found! — (19)  Wherefore,  let 
them  who  suffer  according  to  the  pleasure  of  God, 


12 
13 


Sy.  IslLk* 


.^s^ 


^  Gr.  is  saved. 


426 


1    PETER,    V. 


Sy.  ly  good 
deeds. 


Sy.t 


^  '  »  (^ 


sy-l 


<=  Sy. 


ft  ».f».£) 


-^Sy.lj.^ 


«  Sy.  |Aj5aLl 


Sy.  V 


no 


commend  their  souls  to  him  in  well  doing,  ^  as  to  a 
faithful  Creator. 

And  I,  an  Elder, *  your  associate,  and  a  witness  "V. 
of  the  sufferings  of  the  Messiah,  and -a  participator 
in  his  glory  which  is  to  be  revealed, — entreat  the 
Elders'^   who   are   among  you: — (2)  Feed  ye  the     2 
flock  of  God  which  is  committed  to  you :  have  care 
[for   it],    spiritually;    not   from    compulsion,   but 
voluntarily ;  not  for  base  gain,  but  with  all  your 
heart ;  (3)  not  as  lords  of  the  flock,  but  so  as  to  be     3 
a  good  example  for  them:  (4)  that  when  the  chief     4 
shepherd  shall  be  revealed,  ye  may  receive  from 
him  a  crown  of  glory  that  fixdeth  not. — (5)  And  ye     5 
juniors  submit  yourselves  to  your  seniors'' ;  and 
clothe   yourselves,   stringently,   with  lowliness  of 
mind  one  towards  another ;  because  God  resisteth 
them  who  exalt  themselves,  and  giveth  grace  to 
the  humble.      (6)  Humble  yourselves,   therefore,     6 
under  the  powerful  hand  of  God :  and  it  will  exalt 
3^ou  in,  due  time.     (7)  And  cast  all  your  solicitude     7 
upon  God;  for  he  careth  for  you.     (8)  Be  sober     8 
and  guarded,  because  Satan'i  your  adversary,  like 
a  lion,  roareth,  and  goeth  about,  and  seeketh  whom 
he  may  devour.     (9)  Therefore  resist  him,  being     9 
steadfiist  in  the  faith :  and  knoAV  3'e,  that  the  same 
sufferings   befall   your   brethren    that   are  in  the 
world. 

Now  it  is  the  God  of  grace,  who  hath  called  us  10 
to  his  eternal  glory  by  Jesus  the  Messiah,  that  hath 
given  us,  while  we  sustain  these  light  afflictions,  to 
be  strengthened,  and  confirmed,  and  established  by 
him  for  ever:  (11)  to  whom  be  glory,  and  power, 
and  honor,  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 

These  as  I  account  [them]  few  [things], ^  I  have 
Avritten  to  you  by  Sylvanus,  a  faithful  brother. 
And  I  would  persuade,  and  would  testif)^,  that  this 
is  the  true  grace  of  God, — this  in  which  ye  stand. 
— (13)  The  elect  church  which  is  in  Babylon, f  sa- 
luteth  you;  also  Mark,  my  son.  (14)  Salute  ye 
one  another  with  a  holy  kiss. — Peace  be  with  3'ou 
all,  who  are  in  the  Messiah.     Amen. 

Eiid  of  the  first  Epistle  of  Peter  the  Legate. 


11 


12 


13 
14 


The  Second  Epistle  of  Peter. 


Simon  Peter,  a  servant  and  legate  of  Jesus  the 
Messiah, — to  those-  who  have  obtained  equally  pre- 
cious faith  with  us,  through  the  righteousness  of 

2  our  Lord  and  Eedeemer,  Jesus  the  Messiah ; — (2) 
May  grace  and  peace  abound  to  you,  through  the 

3  recognition^^  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  (3) 
as  the  giver  to  us  of  all  things  that  be  of  the 
power  of  God,  unto  life  and  the  fear  of  God,  through 
the  recognition  of  him  Avho  hath  called  us  unto  his 

4  own  glory  and  moral  excellence:  (4)  wherein  he 
hath  given  you  very  great  and  precious  promises  ; 
that  by  them  ye  might  become  partakers  of  the 
nature  of  God,  Avhile  ye  flee  from  the  corruptions 

5  of  the  lusts  that  are  in  the  world.  (5)  And,  while 
ye  apply^  all  diligence  in  the  matter,  add  to  your 
faith  moral  excellence;  and  to  moral  excellence, 

6  knowledge  ;«  (6)  and  to  knowledge,  perseverance  ; 
and  to  perseverance,  patience ;  and  to  patience,  the 

7  fear  of  God ;  (7)  and  to  the  fear  of  God,  sympathy 
with  the  brotherhood  ;   and  to  sympathy  with  tlie 

8  brotherhood,  love.  (8)  For,  v/hile  these  are  found 
in  you,  and  abounding,  they  render  you  not  sloth- 
ful, and  not  unfruitful,  in  the  recognition  of  our 

9  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah.  (9)  For  he,  in  whom 
these  things  are  not  found,  is  blind  and  seeth  not, 
and  hath  forgotten  the  purgation  of  his  former  sins, 

10  (10)  And  therefore,  my  brethren,  be  ye  exceedingly 
diligent  to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure,<^ 
by  your  good  actions:    for,  by  so  doing,  ye  will 

11  never  fall  away.  (11)  For  thus  will  entrance  be 
given  you  abundantly,  into  the  everlasting  king- 
dom of  our  Lord  and  Eedeemer  Jesus  the  Messiah. 

12  And  for  this  reason  I  am  not  wearied  in  remind- 
ing you  continually  of  these  things;  although  ye 
know  them  well,  and  are  established  in  this  truth. 

13  (13)  And  it  seemeth  right  to  me,  so  long  as  I  am 


or,  acknowl- 
edgment. 


•>  Sy,  introduce. 
"=  or,  intelli- 
sence. 


Sy.]Z.5 


428 


2  PETER,    II. 


^  i.  e.  is  not  its 
02cn  exposi- 
tor.* 


in  this  body,  to  excite  you  by  monition ;  (14)  since  14 
I  know,  that  the  demise  of  my  body  is  speedy,  as 
also  my  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah  hath  showed  me. 
e  Some  copies:  (15)  And  1  am  anxious,^  that,  after  my  departure,  15 
strive  ye.  ye  too  may  have  it  always  with  you  to  make  men- 

tion of  these  things.     (16)  For  we  have  not  gone  16 
after  fables  artfully  framed,  in  making  known  to 
you  the  power  and  advent  of  oar  Lord  Jesus  the 
Messiah  ;  but  [it  was]  after  we  had  been  spectator.s 
of  his  majesty.     (17)  For,  when  he  received  from  17 
God  the  Father  honor  and  glory,  and,  after  the 
splendid  glory  of  his  majesty,  a  voice  came  to  him, 
thus:  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well 
pleased ;    (18)  we  also  heard  this  identical  voice  18 
from  heaven,  which  came  to  him  while  we  were 
with  him  in  the  holy  mount.     (19)  And  we  have  19 
moreover  a  sure  word  of  prophecy ;  and  ye  will  do 
well,  if  ye  lodk  to  it  as  to  a  light  that  shineth  in  a 
dark  place,  until  the  day  shall  dawn,  and  the  sun 
shall  arise  in  your  hearts;  (20)  ye  having  the  pre-  20 
vious  knowledge,  that  no  prophecy  is  an  exposition 
of  its  own  text.f    (21)  For  at  no  time  was  it  by  the  21 
pleasure  of  ratin,  that  the  prophecy  came;  but  holy 
men  of  God  spoke,  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Iloly 
Spirit. 

But  in  the  world,  there  have  been  also  false  pro-  11. 
phets,  as  there  will  likewise  be  false  teachers  among 
you,  who  will  bring  in  destructive  heresies,^  deny- 
ing the  Lord  that  bought  them;  thus  bringing  on 
themselves  swift  destruction.     (2)  And  many  will     2 
go  after  their  profaneness;  on  account  of  whom, 
the  way  of  truth  will  be  reproached.     (3)  And,  in     3 
the    cupidity    of  raving   words,   they   will    make 
merchandise  of  you: — whose  judgment,  of  a  long 
time,  is  not  idle;  and  their  destruction  slumbereth 
not.     (4)  For,  if  God  spared  not  the  angels  that     4 
Sy.  sinned,  but  cast  them  do.wn  to  the  infernal  region^  - 

lAjA>:»ArD    in  chains  of  darkness,  and  delivered  them  up  to  be 

kept  unto  the  judgment  of  torture,  (5)  and  spared     5 


*  The  Greek  of  this  difficult  passage  reads:  if&fu  '7r'po(pv)TSia  'ypoi:pYjs  iSiag 
eVjX'jtfswff  ou  yi'vsra/.  The  Syriac  requires  fV/XoCiff,  for  S'TriXjo'Sij- ;  and  then, 
supposin;^  ypacpr^g  to  depend  on  s-riXutfiff,  it  obtains  the  sij^nificant  interpretation, 
tliat  no  propliecy  ex  pi  i  ins  itself,  and  consequently  cannot  well  be  understood, 
until  its  fulfillment  shall  make  it  clear. 


2  PETER,    II. 

not   the   former   world,  bat   preserved   Noah  the 
eighth^  person,  a  preacher  of  righteousness,  when  he 

6  brought  a  flood  on  the  world  of  the  wicked ;  (6) 
[and]  burned  up  the  cities  of  Sodom  and  Gomor- 
rah, and  condemned  them  by  an  overthrow,  making 
them  a  demonstration  to'  the  wicked  who  should 

7  come  after  them;  (7)  and  also  delivered  righteous 
Lot,  who  was  tormented  with  the  filthy  conduct 

8  of  the  lawless ;  (8) — for  that  upright  man  dwelling 
among  them,  in  seeing  and  hearing  from  day  to 
day,  was  distressed  in  his  righteous  soul  by  their 

9  lawless  deeds ; — (9)  the  Lord  kn9weth  how  to  res- 
cue from  afflictions  those  who  fear  him;  and  he 
will  reserve  the  wicked  for  the  day  of  judgment  to 

10  be  tormented,  (10)  and  especially  them  who  go 
after  the  flesh  in  the  lusts  of  pollution,  and  despise 
government.     Daring  and  arrogant,  they  shudder 

11  not  with  awe  while  they  blaspheme ;  (11)  whereas 
angels,  greater  than  they  in  might  and  valor,  bring 

12  not  against  them  a  reproachful  denunciation.  (12) 
But  these,  like  the  dumb  beasts  that  by  nature  are 
for  slaughter  and  corruption,  while  reviling  the 
things  they  know  not,  will  perish  in  their  own  cor- 

13  ruption ;  (l3)  they  being  persons  with  whom  ini- 
quity is  the  reward  of  iniquity,  and  by  them  riot- 
ing in  the  daytime  is  accounted  delightful ;  defiled 
and  full  of  spots  [are  they],  indulging  themselves 
at  their  ease,  while  they  give  themselves  up  to 

1-1  pleasure ;  (11)  having  eyes  that  are  full  of  adulter}-, 
and  sins  that  never  end ;  seducing  unstable  souls ; 
and  having  a  heart  exercised  in  cupidity ;  children 

15  of  malediction :  (15)  and,  having  left  the  way  of 
rectitude,  they  have  wandered  and  gone  in  the  way 
of  Balaam  the  son  of  Beor,  who  loved  the  wages 

16  of  iniquit}^,  (16)  and  who  had  for  the  reprover  of  his 
transgression  a  dumb  ass,  which,  speaking  with  the 
speech  of  men,  rebuked  the  madness  of  the  prophet. 

17  (17)  Tliese  are  wells  without  water,  clouds  driven 
by  a  tempest,'^  persons  for  whom  is  reserved  the 

18  blackness  of  darkness.  (18)  For,  while  they  utter 
astonishing^  vanity,  they  seduce,  with  obscene  lusts 
of  the  flesh,   them  Avho  have  almost  abandoned 

19  these  that  walk  in  error.  (19)  And  they  promise 
them  liberty,  while  they  themselves  are  the  slaves 
of  corruption:    for,  by  whatever  thing  a  man  is 

20  vanquished,  to  that  is  he  enslaved,     (20)  For  if, 


429 


i.  e,  one  of  the 
eight  persons. 


^  Some  copies; 

from  above. 
«  Some  copies: 

ridiculous. 


430 


1   PETER,    III. 


f  or,  aclxnowl- 
edged. 


Sy,  in  the  end 
of  days. 


•"Sy. 
Gr.  gToiyjia. 


when  tliey  have  escaped  the  pollutions  of  the  world 
by  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Eedeemer  Jesus 
the  Messiah,  they  become  again  involved  in  the 
same,  and  are  vanquished,  their  latter  state  is  worse 
than  the  former.  (21)  For  it  would  have  been  21 
better  for  them,  not  to  have  knownf  the  way  of 
righteousness,  than  after  having  known  [it],  to  turn 
back  from  the  holy  commandment  that  was  deliv- 
ered to  them.  (22)  But  the  true  proverb  hath  22 
happened  to  them :  the  dog  returneth  to  his  vomit ; 
and  the  sow  that  was  washed,  to  her  wallowing  in 
the  mire. 

This  second  epistle,  my  beloved,  I  now  write  to  III. 
you;    in   [both  of]   which  I  stir  up  your  honest 
mind  by  admonition  :  (2)  that  ye  may  be  mindful     2 
of  the  words  which  were  formerly  spoken  by  the 
holy  prophets,  and  of  the  injunction  of  our  Lord 
and  Redeemer  by  the  hand  of  the  legates:    (3)     3 
knowing  this  previously,  that  there  will  come  in 
the  last  days'*  scoffers,  who  will  scoff,  walking  ac- 
cording to  their  own  lusts ;  (4)  and  saying,  Where     4 
is  the  promise  of  his  coming?  for,  since  our  fathers 
fell  asleep,  every  tiling  remaineth  just  as  from  the 
beginning  of  the  creation.     (5)  For  this  they  will-     5 
ingly  forget,  that  the  heavens  were  of  old;    and 
the  earth  rose  up  from  the  waters,  and  by  means 
of  water,  by  the  word  of  God.    (6)  [And,]  by  means     6 
of  these  [waters],  the  world  Avhich  then  was,  [being 
submerged]  again  perished  in  the  waters.  (7)  And     7 
the  heavens  that  now  are,  and  the  earth,  are  by  his 
word  stored  up,  being  reserved  for  the  fire  at  the 
day  of  judgment  and  the  perdition  of  "wicked  men. 
— (8)  And  of  this  one  thing,  my  beloved,  be  not     8 
forgetful,  T]\at  one  day,  to  the  Lord,  is  as  a  thou- 
sand years ;  and  a  thousand  years,  as  one  day.     (9)     9 
The  Lord  doth  not  procrastinate  his  promises,  as 
some  estimate  procrastination;  but  he  is  long  suf- 
fering, for  your  sakcs,  being  not  willing  that  any 
should  perish,  but  that  every  one  should  come  to 
repentance.     (10)  And  the  day  of  the  Lord  will  10 
come,  like  a  thief;  in  which  the  heavens  will  sud- 
denly pass  away ;  and  the  elements,''  being  ignited, 
will  be  dissolved;    and  the  earth  and  the  works 
in  it,  will  not  be  found. — (11)  As  therefore  all  these  11 
things  arc  to  be  dissolved,  what  persons  ought  jq 


1    JOHN,    I. 


431 


12  to  be,  in  holy  conduct,  and  in  the  fear  of  God,  (12) 
expecting  and  desiring  the  coming  of  the  day  of 
God,  in  which  tlie  heavens  being  tried  by  fire  will 
be  dissolved,  and  the  elements  being  ignited  will 

13  melt?  (13)  But  we,  according  to  his  promise, 
expect  new  heavens,  and  a  new  earth,  in  which 
righteousness  dwelleth, 

14  ■  Therefore,  my  beloved,  as  ye  expect  these  things, 
strive  that  ye  may  be  found  by  him  in  peace,  with- 

15  out  spot  and  without  blemish.  (15)  And  account 
the  long  suffering  of  the  Lord  to  be  redemption ; 
as  also  our  beloved  brother  Paul,  according  to  the 

16  wisdom  conferred  on  him,  wrote  to  you;  (16)  as 
also  in  all  his  epistles,  speaking  in  them  of  these 
things,  in  which  there  is  something  difficult  to  be 
understood ;  [and]  which  they  who  are  ignorant 
and  "unstable,  pervert,  as  they  do  also  the  rest  of 

17  the  scriptures,  to  their  own  destruction. — (17)  Ye 
therefore,  my  beloved,  as  ye  know  [these  things] 
beforehand,  guard  yourselves,  lest,  by  going  after 
the  error  of  the  lawless,  ye  fall  from  your  steadfast- 

18  ness.  (18)  But  be  ye  growing  in  grace,  and  in  the 
knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Redeemer  Jesus  the 
Messiah,  and  of  God  the  Father  :  whose  is  the  glory, 
now,  and  always,  and  to  the  days  of  eternity.<= 
Amen. 

End  of  the  second  Epistle  of  Peter  the  Legate. 


Sy.  tViNs, 


Agaiu : 
The  Epistle  of  John  the  Legate. 


We  announce  to  you  that,  which  was  from  the 
beginning,  which  we  have  heard,  and  have  seen 
with  our  eyes,  looked  upon,  and  handled  with  our 
hands,  that  which  is  the  word  of  life.*  (2)  And 
the  life  was  manifested,  and  we  have  seen  and  do 
testify  and  announce  to  3^ou,  the  life  which  is  eter- 
nal ;  which  was  with  the  Father,  and  was  revealed 


»  Sy. 


432 


1   JOHN,    II. 


Gr. 

rrapaxKriTog. 

^  Sy.  ]imCLK> 


to  Tis.  (3)  And  what  we  have  seen  and  heard,  we 
make  known  to  you  also,  that  ye  may  have  fellow- 
ship with  us ;  and  our  fellowship  is  with  the  Fa- 
ther, and  with  his  Son  Jesus  the  Messiah.  (4)  And 
these  things  we  write  to  you,  that  our  joy  in  3'ou 
may  be  complete. 

And  this  is  the  announcement,  which  we  have 
heard  from  him  and  declare  to  you,  that  God  is 
light,  and  no  darkness  at  all  is  in  him.  (6)  And 
if  we  say  that  we  have  fellowship  with  him,  and  we 
walk  in  the  darkness,  we  are  liars,  and  walk  not  in 
the  truth.  (7)  But  if  we  walk  in  the  light,  as  he 
is  in  the  light,  Ave  have  fellowship  with  each  other, 
and  the  blood  of  Jesus  his  Son  cleanseth  us  from 
all  our  sins,— (8)  And  if  we  say  that  we  have  no 
sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in 
us.  (9)  But  if  we  confess  our  sins,  he  is  faithful 
and  righteous,  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse 
us  from  all  our  iniquity.  (10)  If  we  say  that  we 
have  not  sinned,  wc  make  him  a  liar,  and  his  word 
is  not  with  us. 


10 


My  children,  these  things  I  write  to  you,  that  ye  II. 
sin  not.     But  if  any  one  should  sin,  we  have  an 
Advocate^i  with  the  Father,  Jesus  the  Messiah,  the 
righteous.     (2)  For  he  is  himself  the  propitiation^     2 
for  our  sins ;  and  not  for  ours  only,  but  also  for  all 
the  world. — (3)  And  by  this  we  shall  be  sensible     3 
that  we  know  him,  if  we  keep  his  commandments. 
(4)  For  he  that  saith,  I  know  him,  and  doth  not     4 
keep  his  commandments,  is  a  liar,  and  the  truth  is 
not  in  him.     (5)  But  he  that  keepeth  his  word,  in     5 
him  is  the  love  of  God  truly  completed:  for  by  this 
we  know  that  we  are  in  him.     (6)  Ue  that  saith,     6 
I  am  in  him,  is  bound  to  walk  according  to  his 
walkings. — (7)  My  beloved,  I  write  no  new  com-     7 
mandment  to  you,  but  the  old  commandment  which 
ye  had  from  the  iDeginning ;  and  the  old  command- 
ment is  the  word,  which  ye  have  heard.    (8)  Again,     8 
a  new  commandment  I  write  to  you,  which  is  true 
in  him  and  in  you ;    because  the  darkness  hath 
passed  away,  and  the  true  light  begin ncth  to  ap- 
pear.    (9)  Whoever  therefore  shall  say  that  he  is     9 
in  the  light,  and  hateth  his  brother,  is  in  darkness 
until  now.     (10)  lie  that  loveth  his  brother,  abi-  10 
deth   in  the  li"ht,   and  in  him  is  no  stumbUug. 


1  JOHN,  II. 


433 


11  (11)  But  lie  that  hatetli  hisbrotlier,  is  in  darkness, 
and  v,^alketh  in  darkness;  and  he  knoweth  not 
whither  he  goeth,  because  the  darkness  hath  blinded 
his  eyes. 

12  I  write  to  you,  ye  children,  because  your  sins 

13  are  forgiven  you  for  his  name's  sake.  (13)  I  write 
to  you,  ye  fathers,  because  ye  have  known  him 
who  existed  from  the  beginning.  I  write  to  you, 
ye  young  men,  because  ye  have  vanquished  the 

14  evil  one.'^  (14)  I  have  written  to  you,  ye  little 
ones,  because  ye  have  known  the  Father.  I  have 
written  to  you,  ye  fathers,  because  ye  have  known 
him  who  [was]  from  the  beginning,  I  have  written 
to  you,  ye  young  men,  because  ye  are  strong,  and 
the  word  of  God  dwelleth  in  you,  and  je  have  van- 

15  quishecl  the  evil  one.  (15)  Love  not  the  world, 
nor  any  thing  in  it ;  for  whoever  loveth  the  world, 

16  hath  not  the  love  of  the  Father  in  him.  (16)  For 
all  that  is  in  the  world,  is,  the  lust  of  the  body,  and 
the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  the  world ; 
which  are  not  from  the  Father,  but  from  the  world 

17  itself.  (17)  And  the  world  is  passing  away,  [both] 
it  and  the  lust  thereof;  but  he  that  doeth  the  pleas- 

18  ure  of  God,  abideth  for  ever. — (18)  My  children, 
it  is  the  latter  time ;  and  as  ye  have  heard  that  a 
false  Messiah'!  was  to  arise,  so  there  are  now  many 
false  Messiahs  ;e  and  from  this  we  know  that  it  is 

19  the  latter  time.  (19)  From  us  they  went  out,  but 
they  were  not  of  us ;  for  if  they  had  been  of  us, 
they  would  have  continued  with  us  :  but  they  went 
out  from  us,  that  so  it  might  be  known,  that  they 

20  were  not  of  us.  (20)  But  ye  have  an  unction^  from 
the  Holy  [One] ;  and  ye  discriminate  every  per- 

21  son.  (21)  I  have  not  written  to  you,  because  ye 
know  not  the  truth,  but  because  ye  know  it,  and 

22  because  no  falsehood  is  of  the  truth.  (22)  Who  is 
false,  but  he  that  denieth  that  Jesus  is  the  Messiah  ? 
And  that  person  is  a  false  Messiah.     He  that  deni- 

23  eth  the  Father,  denieth  also  the  Son.  (23)  And 
he  that  denieth  the  Son,  also  believeth  not  the 
Father.      He  that  confesseth  the  Son,  confesseth 

24  also  the  Father.  (24)  And  what  ye  heard  from 
the  first,  let  that  remain  with  you.  For  if  that, 
which  ye  heard  from  the  first,  remaineth  Avith  you, 
ye  also  will  remain  in  the  Father  and  in  the  Son, 

25  (25)  And  this  is  the  promise,  which  he  hath  prom- 


Sy-l 


n  fl*^ 


'Sy. 

■■  Sy.  ^ 

■  Sy. 


434 


1   JOHN,    III. 


5  or,  it. 


•>  i.  e.  confi- 
dence. 


i.  e.  the  Mes- 
siah. 


Sy.]j4lD 


Sy.  ^Zl 


28 


29 


ised  us,  [even]  life  eternal.  (2G)  And  these  things  26 
I  have  written  to  you,  on  account  of  those  who  se- 
duce jou.  (27)  And  ye  also,  if  the  unction  which  27 
ye  have  received  from  him  remaineth  in  you,  need 
not  that  any  one  should  teach  you ;  but  as  that 
unction  is  from  God,  it  teacheth  you  all  things ;  and 
it  is  true,  and  no  falsehood  is  in  it.  And  as  it  hath 
taught  you,  remain  ye  in  him.s 

And  now,  my  children,  remain  ye  in  him  ;  that 
so,  when  he  shall  be  manifested,  we  may  not  be 
ashamed  before  him,  but  may  have  an  open  coun- 
tenance^i  at  his  coming.     (29)  If  ye  know  that  he 
is  righteous,  ye  also  know,  that  whoever  doeth 
righteousness,   is  from  him.      (III.)  And  ye  see.  Ill 
how  great  is*  the  love  of  the  Father  towards  us,  who 
hath  called  us  sons,  and  made  us  [such].     There- 
fore the  world  knoweth  us  not,  because  it  likewise 
knoweth  him  not.     (2)  My  beloved,  now  are  we     2 
the  sons  of  God  ;  and  hitherto,  it  hath  not  appeared 
what  we  are  to  be :  but  we  know  that,  when  he 
shall  appear,  we  shall  be  in  his  likeness,  and  we 
shall  see  him  as  he  is. — (3)  And  every  one   that     c 
hath  this  hope  from  him,^  puritieth  himself,  as  he 
is  pure.     (4)  And  every  one  that  practiseth  sin,     4 
perpetrateth    iniquity;    for   all   sin   is    iniquity.^ 
(5)  And  ye  know,  that  he  was  manifested  to  take     i 
away  our  sins ;  and  in  him  was  no  sin.     (6)  And     ( 
every  one  that  abideth  in  him,  sinneth  not :  and 
every  one  that  sinneth,   hath  not  seen  him,   nor 
hath  known  him.      (7)    My  children,  let  no  one     'J 
deceive  you :  he  that  doeth  righteousness,  is  righ- 
teous, as  the  Messiah  also  is  righteous.     (8)  And 
he  that  committeth  sin,  is  of  Satan  ;<=  because  Satan 
was  a  sinner  from  the  beginning:    and  for  this 
cause,  the  Son  of  God  appeared,  that  he  might  de- 
stroy the  works  of  Satan.     (9)  Every  one  that  is 
born  of  God,  doth  not  practise  sin ;    because  his 
seed  is  in  him,  and  he  cannot  sin,  because  he  is 
born<i  of  God.     (10)  By  this  are  the  children  of 
God  discriminated  from  the  children  of  Satan. 

Every  one  that  practiseth  not  righteousness,  and 
thatloveth  not  his  brother,  is  not  of  God:  (11)  be-  11 
cause  this  is  the  commandment,  which  ye  heard 
from    the    beginning,    that    ye   should  love   one 
another.     (12)  Not  like  Cain,  who  was  of  the  evil  12 
lone,  and  slew  his  brother.     And  why  did  he  slay 


8 


9 


10 


1   JOHN,    IV. 


435 


13 
14 


16 


17 


him,-but  because  his  own  works  were  evil,  and  those 
of  his  brother  righteous?  (13)  And  wonder  not, 
my  brethren,  if  the  world  hate  you,  (14)  We 
knoAY  that  we  have  turned  from  death  unto  life,  by 
this,  that  we  love  the  brethren.  He  that  loveth 
15  not  his  brother,  remaineth  in  death.  (15)  For  every 
one  that  hateth  his  brother,  is  a  man-slayer ;  and 
ye  know,  that  no  man-slayer  can  have  eternal  life 
abiding  in  him. — (16)  By  this  we  know  his  love 
towards  us,  because  he  gave  up  his  life^  for  us: 
and  we  also  ought  to  give  up  our  lives^  for  our 
brethren.  (17)  But  whoever  hath  worldly  posses- 
sions, and  seeth  his  brother  in  want,  and  shutteth 
up  his  bowels  from  him,  how  is  the  love  of  God  in 

18  him?  (18)  My  children,  let  us  not  love- one  another 
in  words  and  in  tongue,  but  in  acts  and  in  truth. 

19  (19)  And  by  this,  we  recognize  that  we  are  of  the 
truth  ;  and,  before  he  shall  come,  we  make  our 
hearts  confident.  (20)  But  if  our  heart  condemneth 
us,  how  much  greater  is  God  than  our  heart,  and 
knowing  all  things  ?  (21)  My  beloved,  if  our  heart 
condemneth  us  not,  we  have  open  countenances?  be- 
fore God.  (22)  And  Avhatever  we  ask,  we  receive 
from  him ;  because  we  keep  his  commandments,  and 
do  acceptable  things^'  before  him.  (23)  And  this  is 
his  commandment,  that  we  believe  on  the  name  of- 
his  Son  Jesus  the  Messiah,  and  that  we  love  one 
another  as  he  hath  commanded  us.  (24)  And  he 
that  keepeth  his  commandments,  is  kept  by  him, 
and  he  dwelleth  in  him :  and  by  this  we  under- 
stand that  he  abideth  in  us,  from  his  Spirit  which 
he  hath  given  to  us. 

IV.  My  beloved,  believe  not  all  spirits ;  but  discrimi- 
nate among  spirits,  whether  they  are  of  God:  for 
many  folse  prophets  have  gone  out  into  the  world. 

2  (2)  By  this  the  Spirit  of  God  is  known,  every  spirit 
that  confesseth  that  Jesus  the  Messiah  hath  come  in 

3  the  flesh,  is  of  God.  (3)  And  every  spirit  which 
confesseth  not  that  Jesus  the  Messiah  hath  come  in 
the  flesh,  is  not  of  God ;  but  he  is  of  the  false 
Messiah,  of  Avhom  ye  have  heard  that  he  cometh, 

4  and  now  is  he  already  in  the  world.  '  (4)  But  ye, 
children,  are  of  God  ;  and  ye  have  overcome  them; 
because  greater  is  he  who  is  in  you,  than.he  who  is 

5  in  the  world.     (5)  And  they  are  of  the  world: 


20 


21 
22 


99. 


24 


"=  or,  himself. 
•"  or,  ourselves. 


e  or,  confidence. 


"  Sy.  IZjla^L 


436 


1  JOHN,  V. 


*  Sy.  |j,_a_K»j 

''  i.  e.  be  saved. 

'  Sy.  ].mn  ^. 

■1  Sy.  loOlD 

e  Sy.  \oC'r2i 
'  or,  confidence. 


Sy.  ,  «  N  ^ 


10 


therefore  they    speak  from  the    world,   and  the 
world  heareth  tliem.     (6)  But  we  are  of  God;  and     6 
he  that  knoweth  God,  heareth  us;  and  he  that  is 
not  of  God,  heareth  us  not.     B3'  this,  we  know  the 
spirit  of  truth,  and  the  spirit  of  error. — (7)  My  be-     7 
loved,  let  us  love  one  another:  because  love  is 
from  God ;  and  whoever  loveth,  is  born  of  God, 
and  knoweth  God.     (8)  Because  God  is  love ;  and     8 
whoever  loveth  not,  doth  not  know  God.     (9)  By     9 
this  was  the  love  of  God  towards  us  made  known, 
because  God  sent  his  only-begotten^-  Son  into  the 
world,  that  we  by  him  might  live.''     (10)  In  this  is 
love ;  it  was  not  that  we  loved  God,  but  that  God 
loved  us,  and  sent  his  Son  a  propitiation"  for  our 
sins,     (11)  My  beloved,  if  God  hath  so  loved  us,  11 
we  also  ought  to  love  one  another.     (12)  No  one  12 
hath  ever  seen  God ;  but  if  we  love  one  another, 
God  abideth«^  in  us,  and  his  love  is  perfected  in  us. 
(13)  And  by  this  we  know,  that  we  abide  in  him,  13 
and  that  he  abideth  in  us,  because  he  hath  given  of 
his  Spirit  to  us. — (14)  And  we  liave  seen,  and  do  14 
testify,  that  the  Father  hath  sent  his  Son,  a  Ke- 
deemere  for  the  world.     (15)  Whoever  confesseth  15 
Jesus  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  God  abideth  in  him, 
and  he  abideth  in  God.    (16)  And  we  have  believed  16 
and  known  the  love,  which  God  hath  towards  us : 
for  God  is  love,  and  whoever  abideth  in  love,  abi- 
deth in  God.    (17)  And  hereby  is  his  love  perfected  17 
with  us ;  that  we  may  have  Ojjcn  countenances''  in 
the  day  of  judgment ;  because  as  he  was,  so  also 
are  we  in  this  world.     (18)  In  love  there  is  no  fear;  18 
but   perfect  love   casteth   out   fear;   because   fear 
existeth  in  peril,  and  he  that  feareth  is  not  perfected 
in  love.     (19)  Let  us,  therefore,  love  God ;  because  19 
he  hath  first  loved  us,     (20)  And  if  any  one  shall  20 
say,  I  love  God,  and  yet  hateth  his  brother,  he  is 
a  liar:  for  he  that  loveth  not  his  brotlicr  who  is 
visible,  how  can  he  love  God  who  is  invisible?  (21)  21 
And  this  command  we  have  received  from  him, 
that  whoever  loveth  God,  must  love  also  his  brother. 
— (V.)  Whoever  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Messiah,  Y. 
is  born=^  of  God.     And  whoever  loveth  the  beget- 
ter, loveth  him  also  that  is  begotten  of  him.     (2)     2 
And  by  this  we  know,  that  we  love  the  children 
of  God,  \uhen  we  love  God,  and  follow  his  com- 
mandments,    (3)  For  this  is  the  love  of  God,  that     8 


1    JOHN,    V. 


437 


5  (5 


10 


11 


12 


1o 
O 


14 


15 


16 


17 

18 


we  keep  liis  commandments:  and  his  command- 
ments are  not  burdensome.  (4)  Because,  whoever 
is  born  of  God,  overcometh  the  world :  and  this  is 
the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world, — our  faith. 
(5)  For  who  is  he  that  overcometh  the  world,  but 
he  that  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God  ? 

This  is  he  who  came  by  the  water  and  the  blood. 
— Jesus  the  Messiah ;  not  by  the  Avater  only,  but 
by  the  water  and  the  blood.  And  the  Spirit  testi- 
lieth  ;  because  the  Spirit  is  truth.  [(7*)  For  there 
are  three  that  testify  in  heaven,  the  Father,  the 
Word,  and  the  Floly  Spirit:  and  these  three  are 
one.]  (8)  And  there  are  three  witnesses,  the 
Spirit,  and  the  water,  and  the  blood :  and  these 
three  are  in  union.  (9)  If  we  receive  the  testimony 
of  men,  how  much  greater  is  the  testimony  of  God? 
And  this  is  the  testimony  of  God,  which  he  hath 
testilied  concerning  his  Son.  (10)  Whoever  be- 
lieveth in  the  Son  of  God,  hath  this  testimony  in 
himself  And  whoever  believeth  not  God,  hath 
made  him  a  liar,  by  not  believing  the  testimony 
which  God  hath  testified  concerning  his  Son.  (11) 
And  this  is  the  testimony,  that  God  hath  given  toi 
us  life  eternal,  and  this  life  is^  in  his  Son.  (12)  | 
Every  one  that  taketh  hold"  of  the  Son,  taketh 
hold  of  life ;  and  every  one  that  taketh  not  hold  of 
the  Son,  hath  not  life. 

These  things  have  I  written  to  you,  that  ye  may 
know  that  ye  have  life  eternal, — ye  who  believe  in 
the  name  of  the  Son  of  God.  (14)  And  this  is  the 
confidence'^  that  we  have  towards  him,  that  what- 
ever we  ask  of  him,  agreeably  to  his  will,  he.  hear- 
eth  us.  (15)  And  if  we  are  persuaded  that  he 
heareth  us  respecting  what  we  ask  of  him,  we  are 
confident  of  receiving  presently  the  petitions  which 
we  asked  of  him. — (16)  If  any  one  shall  see  his 
brother  sin  a  sin  which  doth  not  deserve  death,  he 
shall  ask,  and  life  will  be  given  him, — to  them  [I 
say]  who  sin  not  as  unto  death.  For  there  is  a  sin 
of  death;  and  I  do  not  say  of  this,  that  a  man 
should  pfay  for  it.  (17)  For  all  iniquity  is  sin ; 
and  there  is  a  sin  which  is  not  of  death.  (18)  And 
we  know,  that  every  one  who  is  born  of  God,  sin- 
neth  not:  for  he  that  is  born  of  God  keepeth  him- 


Sy.  exists. 
Sy.  rJ^jolj 


Sy. 

Gr.  'TTappTjo'ia. 


*  This  verse  is  wanting  in  most  MSS.,  and  is  omitted  in  the  edit.  London,  1826. 


438 


2   JOHN. 


«  Sy.  \y.^ 

eSy. 


self,  and  the  evil  one  touchetli  liim  not.     (19)  We  19 
know,  that  we  are  of  Grod;  and  all  the  world  is 
reposing  on  the  evil  one.     (20)    And  we  know,  20 
that  the  Son  of  God  hath  come,  and  hath  given  us 
knowledge^  that  we  might  know  the  True  One  ;f 
and  that  we  might  be  in  the  True  One, — in  his  Son 
Jesus  the  Messiah.     He  is  the  true  God,s  and  the  ■ 
life   eternal.     (21)  My   children,  keep   yourselves  21 
from  idolatry. 

End  of  the  first  Epistle  of  Jolm  the  Legale. 


The  Second  Epistle  of  Joliu. 


Eng.  Lad  I/. 


or,  him. 


Sv. 


Sy.  ]  «  t  ■  ,n  The  Eldcr,^  toKuria''  the  elect,  and  to  her  chil- 
^Sy.  "j_.5aiD=  dren  :  whom  I  love  in  the  truth,  and  not  I  only,  but 
Gr.  Kupi'a.  all  they  who  know  the  truth ;  (2)  for  the  sake  of  the 
truth,  which  abideth  in  us  and  is  with  us  for  ever. 
(3)  May  grace  be  with  jou,  and  mercy,  and  peace, 
from  God  the  Father,  and  from  our  Lord  Jesus  the 
Messiah,  the  Son  of  the  Father,  in  truth  and  love. 

1  have  rejoiced  greatly,  that  I  found  [some]  of 
thy  children,  who  walked  in  the  truth,  as  we  have 
received  commandment  from  the  Father.  (5)  And 
now,  I  beseech  thee,  Kuria, — (I  write  no  new  com- 
mandment to  thee,  but  that  which  was  with  us  from 
the  beginning,) — that  we  should  love  one  another. 
(6)  And  this  is  love,  that  we  walk  according  to  the 
commandment.  This  is  the  commandment,  as  ye 
have  heard  from  the  beginning,  that  we  should 
walk  in  it."  (7)  Because  many  seducers  have  gone 
forth  into  the  world,  who  confess  not  that  Jesus  the 
Messiah  hath  come  iu  the  flesh.  This  is  a  seducer 
and  Antichrist.il  (8)  Take  heed  to  yourselves,  that 
>mo  ^m  »;n«  Oj]  ye  lose  not  what  ye  have  wrought ;  but  that  ye 
may  be  recompensed  with  a  full  reward.  (9)  Every 
one  who  trausgresseth,  and  abideth  not  in  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Messiah,  God  is  not  in  him.  And  he 
who  abideth  in  his  doctrine,  he  hath  the  Father  and 


3   JOHN. 


439 


10  the  Son,  (10)  If  any  one  cometli  to  you,  and 
bringeth  not  this  doctrine,  entertain  him  not  in  your 

11  house,  nor  say  to  him,  Joy^  to  thee:  (11) -for  he 
that  saith  to  him,  Joy  to  thee,  is  a  participator  in 
his  evil  deeds. 

12  Having  many  things  I  could  write  to  you,  I  would 
not  with  paper^  and  ink ;  but  I  hope  to  come  to 
you,  and  to  converse  mouth  to  mouth,  that  our  joy 

13  may  be  complete. — (13)  The  children  of  thy  elect 
sister  salute  thee.     Grace  be  with  you.     Amen. 

End  of  the  second  Epislle  of  John  the  Legate. 


Sy.  »^ 


,_KJ 


4-r=^   = 


Gr.  ■^aprrig- 
Lat.  Charla. 


The  Tliird  Epistle  of  John. 


The  Elder, '"^  to  my  beloved  Gains,  whom  I  love 

2  in  the  truth. — (2)  Our  beloved ;  in  all  things,  I 
pray  for  thee  that  thou  mayest  prosper  and  be  in 

3  health,  as  thy  soul  doth  prosper.  (3)  For  I  re- 
joiced greatly,  when  the  brethren  came  and  testified 
concerning  thy  integrity,  even  as  thou  walkestin 

4  the  truth.     (4)  And  I  have  no  greater  joy,  than  to 

5  hear  that  my  children  walk  in  the  truth.  (5)  Our 
beloved,  thou  doest  in  faith,  what  thou  performest 
towards  the  brethren ;  and  especially  towards  stran- 

6  gers,  (6)  who  have  borne  testimony  to  thy  charity 
before  the  whole  church,  to  whom  thou  doest  good, 

7  as  is  pleasing  to  God.  (7)  For  they  Avent  forth  in 
behalf  of  his  name,  taking  nothing  of  the  Gentiles. 

8  (8)  We  therefore  ought  to  receive  such  persons, 
that  we  may  be  aiders  of  the  truth. 

9  I  was  desirous  of  writing  to  the  church  ;  but  he 
who  loveth  to  be  foremost  among  them,  Diotrephes, 

10  receiveth  us  not.  (10)  Therefore,  if  he  come,  re- 
member those  his  doings,  that  he  treated  us  with 
malignant  words;  and  this  not  sufficing  him,  he  re- 
ceived not  the  brethren ;  and  those  who  would 
receive  [them],  he  prohibited,   and   even  ejected 

11  them  from  the  church,     (11)  Our  beloved,  be  not 


Sy.l 


•  1  ft  o 


MO 


JUDE. 


or,  imUalor. 


Sy.  reed. 


a  follower^  of  what  is  evil,  but  of  what  is  good, 
lie  that  doeth  good,  is  of  God ;  but  he  that  doeth 
evil,  hath  not  seen  God. — (12)  Of  Demetrius,  there  12 
is  good  testimony  from  every  one,  and  from  the 
chureh,  and  from  the  truth  itself:  and  Ave  also  bear 
[him]  testimony,  and  ye  know  that  our  testimony 
is  true. 

I  had  many  things  to  write  to  thee ;  but  I  will  13 
not   write    [them]     to   thee    with   ink   and   pen.^ 
(14)  But  I  hope  soon  to  see  thee,  and  to  converse  1-4 
mouth  to  mouth.     (15)  Peace  be  with  thee. — The  15 
friends  salute  thee.     Salute  the  friends,  severally, 
by  name. 

End  of  the  third  Epistle  of  John  the  Legate. 


The  Epislle  of  Jiide,  the  Brother  of  James. 


Gr.  salvation. 


or,  priority. 


JuDE,  a  servant  of  Jesus  the  Messiah,  and  the 
brother  of  James, — to  the  called  peo})le,  the  beloved 
of  God  the  Father,  the  preserved  by  Jesus  the  Mes- 
siah : — (2)  Mercy  and  peace  in  love,  be  multiplied 
to  you. 

My  beloved,  while  I  take  all  pains  to  write  to 
you  of  our  common  Yifc,^  it  is  needful  for  me  to 
write  to  you,  exhorting  you  to  maintain  a  conflict 
for  the  faith  which  was  once  delivered  to  the  saints. 

(4)  For  some  have  obtained  entrance,  who  from  the 
beginning  were  registered  beforehand  under  this 
condemnation :  wicked  men,  who  pervert  the  grace 
of  God  to  impurity,  and  deny  him  Avho  is  the  only 
Lord   God   and  our  Lord,  Jesus   the  Messiah. — 

(5)  And  I  wish  to  remind  you, — though  ye  all 
know  it, — that  God,  after  once  rescuing  the  people 
from  Egypt,  again  destroyed  them  who  believed 
not,  (6)  And  the  angels  that  ke])t  not  their  pri- 
macy, "^  but  left  their  station,  he  hath  reserved  iu 
chains  unknown,  under  darkness,  unto  the  judgment 


JUDE. 


441 


7  of  the  great  clay.  (7)  As  Sodom  and  Gomorrali, 
and  the  surrounding  cities,  which  in  like  manner 
followed  whoredom  and  went  after  strange  flesh, 
are  placed  beneath  everlasting  fire,  being  doomed 

8  to  judgment. — (8)  In  the  same  manner,  too,  these 
sensual  dreamers*^  defile  the  flesh,  and  despise  au- 

9  thoritj,  and  revile  excellency.  (9)  But  Michael 
the  archangel,  who,  in  debate  with  the  Accuser,  con- 
tended about  the  body  of  Moses,  did  not  venture  to 
bring  against  him  a  reviling  declaration  ;  but  said, 

10  The  Lord  will  rebuke  thee.  (10)  But  these  [men] 
revile  things  which  they  do  not  understand ;  and 
in  the  things  of  which  they  have  a  natural  persua- 
sion as  animal  beings,  in  these  they  corrupt  them- 

11  selves.  (11)  Woe  to  them  ;  for  they  have  gone  in 
the  way  of  Cain ;  and,  after  the  error  of  Balaam, 
they  have  lusted  for  gain ;  and,  in  the  rebellion 

12  of  Korah,  they  have  perished. '^ — (12)  These  are 
they  who,  in  their  feastings,  riot  while  polluting 
themselves,  feeding  themselves  without  fear;  clouds 
without  rain,  moved  about  by  the  winds  ;  trees 
whose  fruit  hath  failed,  and  they  are  without  fruit, 

13  twice  dead,  and  uplifted  from  their  root ;  (13)  ra- 
ging waves  of  the  sea,  which,  by  their  foam,  mani- 
fest their  confusion  ;  shooting-stars,^  for  which  is 
reserved   the   blackness   of  darkness    for   ever. — 

14  (14)  And  of  them  also  prophesied  Enoch,  who  was 
the  seventh  from  Adam,  when  he  said:  Behold, 
the    Lord    cometh,    with    myriads    of  his   saints ; 

15  (15)  to  execute  judgment  upon  all;  and  to  convict 
all  the  wicked,  because  of  all  the  deeds  they  have 
wickedly  committed ;  and  because  of  all  the  hard 
speeches,  which  they,   ungodly  sinners,  have  ut- 

16  tered.  (16)  These  are  they  who  murmur  and  com- 
plain of  every  thing,  while  they  walk  according  to 
their  lusts;  and  their  mouth  speaketh  shocking 
things;  and  they  flatter  people,  for  the  sake  of 

17  gain. — (17)  But  do  ye,  my  beloved,  remember  the 
words  which  were  before  spoken  by  the  legates  of 

18  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah  ;  (18)  because  they  told 
3'OU,  that  in  the  end  of  the  times  there  would  be 
scoffers,  going  after  wickedness,  according  to  their 
lusts. 

19  These  are  they  that  separate  [themselves],  sen- 

20  sual  persons, f  not  having  the  Spirit.  (20)  But,  my 
beloved,  be  ye  built  up  anew,  in  your  hol}^  faith. 


<=  or,  debauched 
in  dreams. 


'  i.  e.  ivill perish. 


or,  meteors. 


Sy. 


442                                      APOCALYPSE,    I. 

through  the  Holy  SiDirit,  -while  yc  pray.     (21)  And  21 
let  us  keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  Grod,  while  we 
wait  for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah, 
unto  our  eternal  life.     (22)  And  some  of  them,  22 
snatch  ye  from  the  fire.  (23)  And  when  they  repent,  23 
have  compassion  on  them,  with  fear,  hating  even 
the  tunic  tliat  is  defiled  by  the  flesh. 

And  to  him  who  is  able  to  preserve  you  fiiultless,  24 
and  spotless,  and  to  establish  you  without  a  blemish, 
(25)  before  his  majesty,  with  joy, — [namely,]  the  25 
only  God,  our  Deliverer,  by  means  of  Jesus  the 
Messiah  our  Lord, — be  praise,  and  dominion,  and 
honor,  and  majesty,  both  now  and  in   all  ages. 
Amen. 

End  of  the  Epistle  of  Jitde  the  Legate,  the  brother  of  James 
aiid  Joses. 

The  Revelation,  which  was  made  by  God  to  John  the  Evangelist, 
in  tlic  Island  of  Patmos, 

To  which  he  was  banished  by  Nero  the  Emperor. 

The  Revelation  of  Jesus  the  Messiah,  which  God    I. 
gave  to  him,  to  show  to  his  servants  the  things  that 
must  shortly  occur :  and  he  signified  [it]  by  send- 
ing,  through  his  angel,  to  his  servant  John;    (2)     2 
who  bore  witness  to  the  word  of  God,  and  to  the 
testimony  of  -Jesus  the  Messiah,  as  to  all  that  he 
saw.     (3)  Blessed  is  he  that  readeth,  and  they  who     3 
hear  the   words  of  this  prophecy,   and  keep  the 
things  that  are  written  in  it;  for  the  time  is  near. 

John  to  the  seven  churches  which  are  in  Asia:     4 
Grace  to  you  and  quietude,  from  him  who  is,  and 
who  was,  and  who  is  to  come;    from  the  seven 
Spirits  which  arc  before  liis  throne ;  (5)  and  from     5 
Jesus  the  Messiah,  the  Witness,  the  Faithful,  the 

APOCALYPSE,  I. 


443 


First-born  of  the  dead,  and  the  Prince  of  the  kings 
of  the  earth ;  who  hath  loved  us,  and  released  us 

6  from  our  sins  by  his  blood  ;  (6)  and  hath  made  us 
a  kingxlom  sacerdotal'''  to  God  and  his  Father:  to 
whom   be   glory  and  power,   for  ever   and  ever. 

7  Amen. — (7)  Behold,  he  cometh  with  clouds;  and 
all  eyes  shall  see  him,  and  also  they  who  speared 
him  ;  and  all  the  tribes  of  the  earth  shall  mourn  on 

8  account  of  him.  Yes:  Amen.  (8)  I  am  Alpha, 
also  Omega,  1^  saith  the  Lord  God ;  who  is,  and  was, 

9  and  is  to  come,  the  omnipotent.^ — (9)  I  John,  your 
brother,  and  partaker  with  you  in  the  affliction  and 
suffering  that  are  in  Jesus  the  Messiah,  was  in  the 
island  called  Patmos,'!  because  of  the  word  of  God, 
and  because  of  the  testimony  of  Jesus  the  Messiah. 
(10)  I  was  in  the  Spirit  on  the  Lord's  day ;  and  I 
heard  behind  me  a  great  voice,  as  of  a  trumpet, 
which  said:  (11)  That  which  thou  seest,  write  in  a 
book,  and  send  to  the  seven  churches,  to  Ephesus, 
and  to  Smyrna,  and  to  Pergamos,  and  to  Thyatira, 
and  to  Sardis,  and  to  Philadelphia,  and  to  Laodicea, 
— (12)  And  I  turned  myself  to  look  at  the  voice 
that  talked  with  me ;  and  when  I  had  turned,  I  saw 
seven  candlesticks  of  gold ;  (13)  and,  in  the  midst 
of  the  candlesticks,  one  like  the  Son  of  man,  clothed 
to  the  feet,e  and  girded  about  his  paps  with  a  girdle 
of  gold.  (14)  And  his  head  and  his  hair  were 
white,  like  white  wool,  like  snow;  and  his  eyes, 
like  a  flame  of  fire :  (15)  and  his  feet  were  like  fine^ 
brass,  flaming  in  a  furnace :  and  his  voice,  like  the 

16  sound  of  many  waters.  (16)  And  he  had  in  his 
right  hand  seven  stars ;  and  from  his  mouth  issued 
a  sharp  two-edged  sword ;  and  his  visage  was  like 
the  sun  shining  in  its  strength.  (17)  And  when  I 
saw  him,  I  fell  at  his  feet  like  one  dead.  And  he 
laid  his  right  hand  upon  me,  and  said,  Fear  not : 

18  I  am  the  First  and  the  Last ;  (18)  and  who  liveth 
and  was  dead ;  and  behold,  I  am  alive  for  ever  and 
ever.     Amen.     And  I  have  the  keys  of  death  and 

19  of  the  unseen  Avorld.ff  (19)  Therefore,  write  what 
thou  hast  seen,  and  the  things  that  are;  and  the 

20  things  that  are  to  be  hereafter :  (20)  the  mystery  of 
these  seven  stars  which  thou  sawest  in  my  right 
hand,  and  the  seven  candlesticks  of  gold.  Those 
seven  stars  are  the  angels''  of  the  seven  churches ; 
and  the  seven  candlesticks  are  the  seven  churches. 


10 
11 


12 


13 


14 
15 


17 


UonVp 


"  Sy.  OlapJi, 
and  also  Tau 
=  A  <^  Z. 

<=  Sy.  Who 
holdeih  all  in 
his  poicer. 

->  Sy.  vOLdI^S 


Sy.ljjOS): 
Gr.  <]fQSrip7}. 

Sy. 


Sy.^ 


Oi  • 


Sy.  ]£]JSd 


444 


APOCALYPSE,    11. 


Sy.  I^IJlD 


Sy. 


"  or,  garden. 


Sy.  ]r.i7 


To  the  angcl=^  of  the  churcli  wliicli  is  at  Ephesus,  11. 
write :  These  things  saith  he  wlio  holdeth  all  things, 
and  the  seven  stars,  in  his  right  hand ;  lie  that  walk- 
cth  in  the  midst  of  the  seven  candlesticks  of  gold ; 
(2)  I  know  thy  works,  and  thy  toil,  and  thy  patience ;     2 
and  [that]  thou  canst  not  endure  the  wicked  ;  and 
thou  hast  tried  them  who  say  they  are  legates,  and 
are  not ;  and  thou  hast  found  them  liars.     (3)  And     3 
thou  hast  had  patience,  and  hast  borne  the  burden,  on 
account  of  my  name,  and  hast  not  fainted.  (4)  Yet     4 
I  have  [a  charge]  against  thee,  on  account  of  thy 
former  love,  Avhich  thou  hast  left.     (5)  Therefore,     5 
remember  whence  thou  hast  fallen ;  and  repent, 
and  do  the  former  works:  or  if  not,  I  will  come  to 
thee  quickl}^,  and  I  will  remove  thy  candlestick 
from  its  place,  except  thou  repent.     (6)  But  this     6 
thou  hast,  that  thou  hatest  the  deeds  of  the  Nico- 
laitans,'^  which  I  also  [hate]. — (7)  He   that  hath     7 
ears,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the 
churclies.     To  him  who  is  victorious,  will  I  give  to 
eat  of  the  tree  of  life  which,  is  in  the  paradise<=  of 
my  God. 

And  to   the  angel  of  the   churcli  whicli  is  at     8 
Smyrna,  write :  These  things  saith  the  First  and 
the  Last,  he  who  was  dead,  and  liveth.     (9)  I  know     9 
thy  works,  and  the  affliction,  and  the  poverty, — 
(yet  thou  art  rich ;) — and  the  railing  which  is  from 
them  who  say  they  are  Jews,  and  they  are  not, 
but  are  of  the  congregation  of  Satan.     (10)  Be  not  10 
terrified  at.  any  of  the  things  thou  art  to  suffer. 
For  lo,  the  Accuser  will  throw  some  of  you  into 
custody,  that  ye  may  be  tried ;  and  there  will  be 
trouble  to  you  ten  days.     Be  faithful  unto  death, 
and  I  will  give  thee  the  crown  of  life. — (11)  He  11 
that  hath  ears,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  to 
the  churches.     He  that  is  victorious,  shall  not  be 
harmed  by  the  second*^  death. 

And  to  the  angel  of  the  church  at  Pergamos,  12 
write  :  Thus  saith  he  who  hath  the  sharp  two-edged 
sword ;  (13)  I  know  thy  works,  and  where  thou  13 
dwellest,  [even]  where  the  throne  of  Satan  is:  and 
thou  holdest  fast  my  name,  and  hast  not  denied 
the  fliith  of  me,  in  those  days  when  my  faithful 
witness,  who  was  slain  among  you,  was  made  a 
spectacle  where  Satan  dwelleth.     (14)  Yet  I  have  a  14 
small  [charge]  against  thee.     Thou  hast  there  them 


APOCALYPSE,  11. 


445 


Some  MSS, 
tchat  idolaters 
do. 
Sy. 


Sy. 


or,  u'ife. 


who  hold  tlie  doctrine  of  Balaam,  who  taught 
Balak  to  throw  a  stumbling-block  before  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel,  that  they  might  eat  the  sacrifices  of 

15  idols,  e  and  might  commit  whoredom.  (15)  So  also 
thou  hast  them  who  hold  the  doctrine  of  the  Nico- 

16  laitans.f  In  like  manner,  repent  thou.  (16)  Or  if 
not,  I  will  come  to  thee  quickly,  and  I  will  war  upon 

17  them  with  the  sword  of  my  mouth. — (17)  He  that 
hath  ears,  let  him  hear  what  tlie  Spirit  saith  to  the 
churches.  To  him  that  is  victorious,  will  I  give 
to  eat  of  the  hidden  manna ;  and  I  will  give  him  a 
white  counter, g  and  upon  the  counter  a  new  name 
written,  which  no  one  knoweth  but  he  that  receiv- 
eth  it. 

18  And  to  the  angel  of  the  church  at  Thyatira, 
write :  These  things  saith  the  Son  of  God,  who  hath 
his  eyes  like  a  flame  of  fire,  and  his  feet  like  fine 

19  brass :  (19)  I  know  thy  works,  and  love,  and  faith, 
and  service,  and  also  thy  patience ;  and  that  these 

20  thy  latter  Avorks  are  more  than  the  former.  (20) 
But  I  have  [a  charge]  against  thee,  because  thou 
sufferest  thy  woman'^  Jezabel,  who  saith  she  is  a 
prophetess,  and  teacheth,  and  seduceth  my  servants 
to  whoredom,  and  to  eating  of  the  sacrifices  of  idols. 

21  (21)  And  I  gave  her  a  season  for  repentance,  and 

22  she  is  not  disposed  to  repent  of  her  whoredom. 
(22)  Behold,  I  will  cast  her  upon  a  bed,  and  them 
who  commit  adultery  with  her  into  great  affliction, 

23  unless  they  repent  of  their  deeds.  (23)  And  her 
children  will  I  slay  with  death  :  and  all  the  churches 
shall  know,  that  I  am  he  who  searcheth  reins  and 
hearts ;  and  I  will  render  to  each  of  you  according 

24  to  your  works.  (24)  And  I  say  to  you, — to  the 
rest  that  are  in  Thyatira,  to  all  them  who  have  not 
received  this  doctrine,  the  men  who  have  not  known 
the  profound  things  of  Satan,  as  they  say ; — I  lay 

25  no  other  burden  upon   you:    (25)  but,  what  ye 

26  have,  hold  fast  until  I  come. — (26)  And  to  him 
that  is  victorious,  and  to  him  that  observeth  my 
works  unto  the  end,  to  him  will  I  give  authority' 

27  over  the  nations ;  (27)  and  he  shall  rule  them  with 
a  rod  of  iron.;  and  like  vessels  of  pottery,  shall 
they  be  broken :  as  I  also  have  received  of  my 

28  Father.     (28)  And  I  will  give  him  the  morning 

29  star.— (29)  He  that  hath  ears,  let  him  hear  what 
the  Spirit  saith  to  the  churches. 


Sv. 


U^Q-» 


446 


APOCALYPSE,    III. 


*  i.  e.  will  cause. 


And  to  the  angel  of  the  cliurcli  which  is  at  Sar-III. 
dis,  write:  These  things  saith  he  who   hath  the 
seven  Spirits  of  God,  and  the  seven  stars :  I  know 
thy  worivs,  that  thou  hast  a  name  that  thou  livest, 
and  thou  art  dead.     (2)  Awake,  and  preserve  the     2 
things  that  remain,  which  are  ready  to  die ;  for  I 
have  not  found  thy  works  complete  before  my  God, 
(3)  Remember  therefore   how  thou  hast  received     3 
and  heard ;  and  observe  [those  precepts],  and  re- 
pent.    If  then  thou  wilt  not  wake  up,  I  will  come 
upon  thee  as  a  thief;  and  thou  shalt  not  know  at 
what  hour  I  will  come  upon  thee.     (4)  Yet  thou     4 
hast  a  few  names  in  Sardis,  who  have  not  defiled 
their  garments;  and  they  shall  walk  with  me  in 
white,  for  they  are  worthy. — (5)  He  that  is  victo-     5 
rious,  shall  be  so  clothed  in  white  robes  ;  and  I  will 
not  blot  out  their  name  from  the  book  of  life;  and 
I  will  confess  their  name  before  my  Father,  and  be- 
fore his  angels.     (6)  He  that  hath  ears,  let  him  hear     6 
what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the  churches. 

And  to  the  angel  of  the  church  which  is  at  7 
Philadelphia,  Avrite:  These  things  saith  he  that  is 
holy,  he  that  is  true,  he  that  hath  the  key  of  David, 
who  openeth  and  no  man  shutteth,  and  shutteth  and 
no  man  openeth ;  (8)  I  know  thy  works.  And  lo,  8 
I  have  set  before  thee  an  open  door,  which  no  man 
can  shut :  because  thou  hast  a  little  strength  ;  and 
thou  hast  kept  my  word,  and  hast  not  denied  my 
name.  (0)  Behold,  I  Avill  give^^  them  of  the  con-  9 
gregation  of  Satan,  wlio  say  they  are  Jews,  and  are 
not,  but  lie, — behold  I  will  make  them  to  come  and 
do  obeisance  before  thy  feet ;  and  to  know  that  I 
have  loved  thee.  (10)  Because  thou  hast  kept  the  10 
word  of  my  patience,  I  also  will  keep  thee  from 
the  hour  of  temptation,  that  is  to  come  on  all  the 
inhabited  world,  to  try  them  who  dwell  on  the 
earth.  (11)  I  come  quickly:  hold  fast  what  thou 
hast,  so  that  no  one  take  thy  crown. — (12)  Him 
that  is  victorious,  will  I  make  a  pillar  in  the  temple 
of  my  God  ;  and  he  shall  not  again  go  out :  and  I 
will  write  upon  him  the  name  of  my  God,  and  of 
the  new  Jerusalem  which  descendeth  from  heaven 
from  my  God,  and  my  own  new  name.  (13)  He 
that  liath  ears,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  to 
the  churches. 

And  to  the  angel  of  the  church  which  is  at  Lao-  14 


11 
12 


13 


APOCALYPSE,  IV. 


447 


dicea,  write :   These  things  saith  the  Amen,  the 
AVitness,  the  faithful,  the  true,  the  chief'  of  the 

15  creation  of- God:  (15)  I  Icnow  thy  works,  that  thou 
art  neither  hot,  nor  cold ;  I  would  that  thou  wert 

16  cold  or  hot.  (16)  So,  because  thou  art  lukewarm, <= 
neither  hot  nor  cold,  I  am  about  to  vomit  thee 

17  from  my  mouth.  (17)  Because  thou  sayest,  I  am 
rich  and  affluent,  and  have  no  want  of  any  thing ; 
and  thou  knowest  not,  that  thou  art  impotent,  and 

18  miserable,  and  needy,  and  blind,  and  naked;  (18) 
I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  gold  tried  in  the  fire, 
that  thou  mayest  become  ricli ;  and  white  raiment, 
to  be  clothed,  and  that  the  shame  of  thy  naked- 
ness may  not  be  seen ;  and  put  eye-salve  on  thine 

19  eyes,  that  thou  mayest  see.  (19)  As  many  as  I 
love,  I  rebuke  and  chasten.      Be  emulous  there- 

20  fore,  and  repent.  (20)  Behold,  I  have  been  stand- 
ing at  the  door,  and  I  will  knock :  if  any  man  hear 
my  voice,  and  open  the  door,  I  will  come  in  to  him, 

21  and  will  sup  with  him,  and  he  with  me. — (21)  And 
to  him  that  is  victorious,  to  him  will  I  give  to  sit 
with  me  on  my  throne,  even  as  I  was  victorious,  and 

22  sat  down  with  my  Father  on  his  throne.  (22)  He 
that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit 
saith  to  the  churches. 

IV.  After  these  things,  I  looked  and  lo,  a  door  [was] 
open  in  heaven.  And  the  first  voice  which  I  heard, 
was  as  of  a  trumpet  talking  with  me.  It  said, 
Come  up  hither ;  and  I  will  show  thee  the  things 

2  that  must  occur  hereafter,  (2)  Instantly,  I  was  in 
the  Spirit :  and  lo,  a  throne  was  placed  in  heaven ; 

3  and  there  was  [one]  seated  on  the  throne.  (3)  And 
he  who  sat,  was  like  the  appearance  of  a  jasper 
stone,  and  of  a  sardine,   and  of  a  rainbow  of  the 
clouds,  round  about  the  throne,  in  form  as  the  ap- 

4  pearance  of  emeralds.  (4)  Around  the  throne  were 
twenty  and  four  seats;  and  upon  those  seats  sat 
twenty  and  four  Elders,*  who  were  clothed  in  white 
robes,  and  on  whose  heads  were  coronets  of  gold. 

5  (5)  And  from  the  throne  proceeded  lightnings,  and 
the  sound  of  thunders ;  and  seven  lajnps  of  fire 
were  burning  before   his   throne,   which   are  the 

6  seven  Spirits  of  God.  (6)  And  before  the  throne, 
as  it  were  a  sea  of  glass  like  crystal ;  and  in  the 
midst  of  the  throne,  and  around  it,  and  before  the 


Sy.  "U-.? 

Sy.   ')>0  m  CA 


•Sy.  j  «  »  «  o 


448 


APOCALYPSE,    V. 


''  Sy.  "jZcLi_K» 


Sy.  lo*, 
equal,  or  loor- 
thy. 


Sy.  ]A^1 


tlirone,  were  four  Animals,^  full  of  eyes  in  their 
front  and  in  their  rear.     (7)  And  the  iirst  Animal     7 
resembled  a  lion;  and  the  second  Animal  resembled 
a  calf;  and  the  third  Animal  had  a  face  like  a  man ; 
and  the  fourth  Animal  resembled  an  eagle  when 
flying.     (8)  And  these  four  Animals  had,  each  of     8 
them,  six  wings  around  it :  and  within  they  were 
full  of  eyes:  and  they  have  no  cessation,  day  or 
night,  from  saying:  Holy,  Holy,  Holy,  the  Lord 
God,  the  Omnipotent,  who  was,  and  is,  and  is  to 
come.     (9)   And  when  these  Animals  give  glory     9 
and  honor  and  praise  to  him  that  sitteth  on  the 
throne,  to  him  who  liveth  for  ever  and  ever,  (10)  10 
the  twenty  and  four  Elders  fall  down  before  him 
who  sitteth  on  the  throne,  and  they  worship  him 
who  liveth  for  ever  and  ever;  and  they  cast  their 
coronets  before  the  throne,  saying,  (11)  Worth}^  art  11 
thou,  0  Lord  our  God,  the  Holy,  to  receive  glory 
and  honor  and  power;  for  thou  hast  created  all 
things,  and  bj^  thee  they  exist ;  and  because  of  thy 
pleasure  they  had  being  and  were  created. 

And  I  saw,  at  the  right  hand  of  him  who  sat  on  V. 
the  throne,  a  book,  which  was  written  within  and 
on  the  back  side,  and  which  was  sealed  with  seven 
seals.      (2)   And  I  saw  a  strong  angel,  who  pro-     2 
claimed  with  a  loud  voice,  Who  is  competent=^  to 
open  the  book,  and  to  loose  the  seals  thereof?  (3)     3 
And  no  one  either  in  heaven  above,  or  on  the  earth, 
or  beneath  the  earth,  was  able  to  open  the  book,  or 
to  look  thereon.     (4)  And  I  wept  much,  because  no     4 
one  was  found,  who  was  competent  to  open  the 
book,  or  to  look  on  it.     (5)  And  one  of  the  Elders     5 
said  to  me.  Weep  not ;  behold,  the  Lion  of  the  tribe 
of  Judah,  the  Root  of  David,  hath  been  victorious: 
He  will  open  the  book,  and  its  seven  seals. — (6)     6 
And  I  looked,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  Elders  stoocl 
a  lamb,"^  as  if  slain;  and  it  had  seven  horns,  and 
seven  eyes,  which  are  the  seven  Spirits  of  God  that 
are  sent  into  all  the  earth.     (7)  And  he  came,  and     7 
took  the  book  from  the  right  hand  of  him  who  sat 
on  the  throne.     (8)  And  when  he  took  the  book,     8 
the  four  Animals  and  the  twenty  and  four  Elders 
fell  down  before  the  Lamb,  each  of  them  having  a 
harp,   and  cups  of  gold  full  of  odors,  which  arc 
the  suj^plications  of  the  saints,     (9)  And  they  sung     9 


APOCALYPSE,  VI. 


449 


a  new  anthem,  saying :  Competent  art  thou,  to  take 
the  book,  and  to  open  the  seals  thereof;  because 
thou  wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us  to  God  hy 
thy  blood,  out  of  every  tribe,  and  tongue,  and  peo- 

10  pie,  and  nation;  (10)  and  thou  hast  made  them 
Ivings  and  priests  to  our  God ;  and  they  reign  on 

11  the  earth.  (11)  Atid  I  looked,  and  I  heard,  as  it 
were  the  voice  of  many  angels,  around  the  throne, 
and  the  Animals  and  the  Elders;  and  the  number 
of  them  was  a  myriad  of  myriads,  and  thousand  of 

12  thousands,  (12)  who  said,  with  a  loud  voice;  Com- 
petent is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain,  to  receive  power, 
and  riches,  and  wisdom,  and  strength,  and  honor, 

13  and  glory,  and  blessing;  (13)  and  [to be  over]  every 
created  thing,  that  is  in  heaven,  or  on  earth,  or 
under  the  earth,  or  in  the  sea ;  and  all  that  are  in 
them.c  And  I  heard  him  who  sat  on  the  throne  say : 
Unto  the  Lamb  be  given,  blessing,  and  honor,  and 

14  gloiy,  and  power,  for  ever  and  ever.  (14)  And 
the  four  Animals  said:  Amen.  And  the  Elders 
fell  down,  and  adored. 

VI.  And,  when  the  Lamb  had  opened  one  of  the 
seven  seals,  I  looked,  and  I  heard  one  of  the  four 
Animals  say,  as  with  a  voice  of  thunder.  Come,  and 

2  see.  (2)  And  I  looked,  and  there  was  a  white 
horse :  and  he  who  sat  on  it,  had  a  bow ;  and  a 
coronet  was  given  to  liim,  and  he  went  forth  con- 

3  quering,  that  he  might  conquer. — (3)  And  when  he 
had  opened  the   second  seal,  I  heard  the  second 

4  Animal  say.  Come.  (4)  And  there  went  forth 
another,  a  red  horse ;  and  to  him  who  sat  thereon, 
it  was  given,  to  take  tranquillity  from  the  earth ; 
and  that  they  should  kill  one  another ;  and  there 

5  was  given  to  him  a  great  sword. — (5)  And  when 
he  had  opened  the  third  seal,  I  heard  the  third 
Animal  say.  Come,  and  see.  And  I  looked,  and  lo, 
a  black  horse ;  and  he  that  sat  thereon,  had  a  bal- 

6  ance  in  his  hand.  (6)  And  I  heard  a  voice  in  the 
midst  of  the  four  Animals,  saying :  A  choenix  of 
wheat  for  a  denarius,*  and  three  choenices  of  barley 
for  a  denarius ;  and  hurt  not  the  oil  and  the  wine. 

7  — (7)  And  when  he  had  opened  the  fourth  seal,  I 

8  heard  the  fourth  Animal  sa}'^.  Come,  and  see.  (8) 
And  I  looked,  and  lo,  a  pale  horse ;  and  the  name 
of  him  who  sat  thereon  was  Death  ;^  and  Hades'^ 

29 


The  Syriac 
here  diifers 
much  from 
the  Greek. 


i.  e.  about  a 
quart  for  15 
cents. 

Sy.  "jZolD 
Sy.  ^^ 


450 


APOCAXYPSE,    VII. 


^  Sy.  beast  of 
tooth. 


« or,  movement. 


followed  after  liim.  And  tliere  was  given  him 
authority  over  the  fourth  part  of  the  earth,  to  slay 
with  the  sword,  and  by  flimine,  and  by  death,  and 
by  the  ravenous  beasf^  of  the  earth. — (9)  And  when 
he  had  opened  the  fifth  seal,  I  saw  under  the  altar, 
the  souls  of  them  who  were  slain  on  account  of 
the  word  of  God,  and  on  account  of  the  testimony 
to  the  Lamb  which  was  with  them.  (10)  And 
they  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying:  How  long,  0 
Lord,  thou  holy  and  true,  dost  thou  not  judge  and 
avenge  our  blood  on  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth  ? 
(11)  And  to  each  one  of  them  was  given  a  white 
robe ;  and  it  was  told  them,  that  they  must  be  quiet 
yet  a  little  while,  until  the  consummation  of  their 
fellow-servants  and  brethren,  who  were  to  be  killed 
as  they  had  been. — (12)  And  I  looked,  when  he 
had  opened  the  sixth  seal,  and  there  was  a  great 
earthquake  ;c  and  the  sun  became  black,  like  sack- 
cloth of  hair;  and  the  whole  moon  became  like 
blood.  (13)  And  the  "stars  of  heaven  fell  on  the 
earth,  as  a  fig-tree  casteth  its  unripe  figs,  when  it  is 
shaken  by  a  strong  wind.  (14) '  And  the  heavens 
separated,  as  a  book  is  rolled  up :  and  all  moun- 
tains and  islands  were  removed  cut  of  their  places. 
(15)  And  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  the  nobles,  15 
and  the  captains  of  thousands,  and  the  rich  men, 
and  the  men  of  valor,  and  every  servant  and  free 
man,  hid  themselves  in  caves,  and  in  the  clefts  of 
the  mountains;  (16)  and  they  said  to  the  moun- 
tains And  to  the  clefts,  Fall  over  us,  and  hide  us 
from  the  face  of  him  who  sitteth  on  the  throne, 
and  from  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb :  (17)  For  the 
great  day  of  their  wrath  is  come ;  and  who  is  able 
to  stand? 


9 


10 


11 


12 


13 
14 


16 


17 


And  after  these  things  I  saw  four  angels,  who  YII. 
stood  on  the  four  corners  of  the  earth ;  and  they 
held  the  four  winds  of  the  earth,  so  that  the  wind 
blew  not  on  the  earth,  nor  on  the  sea,  nor  on  the 
trees. — (2)  And  I  saw  another  angel,  and  he  came     2 
up  from  the  rising  of  the  sun ;  and  he  had  the  seal 
of  the  living  God ;  and  he  called  out,  with  a  loud 
voice,  to  the  four  angels  to  whom  it  was  given  to 
hurt  the  earth  and  the  sea,  saying:  (3)  Hurt  ye     3 
not  the  earth,  nor  the  sea,  nor  the  trees,  until  wc 
shall  have  sealed  the  servants  of  our  God  upon 


APOCALYPSE,    VIII. 


451 


4  their  foreheads.^-  (4)  And  I  heard  the  number  of 
tlieni  that  were  sealed,  a  hundred  and  forty  and  four 

5  thousand,  sealed  from  every  tribe  of  Israelites.  (5) 
of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  twelve  thousand  were  sealed: 
of  the  tribe   of  Eeuben,  twelve  thousand:  of  the 

6  tribe  of  Gad,  twelve  thousand:  (6)  of  the  tribe  of 
Ashur,  twelve  thousand :  of  the  tribe  of  Naphtali, 
twelve  thousand:  of  the  tribe  of  Manasseh,  twelve 

7  thousand:  (7)  of  the  tribe  of  Simeon,  twelve  thou- 
sand: of  the  tribe  of  Levi,  twelve  thousand:  of  the 

8  tribe  of  Issachar,  twelve  thousand:  (8)  of  the  tribe 
of  Zebulon,  twelve  thousand:  of  the  tribe  of  Jo- 
seph,   twelve   thousand :    of  the   tribe  of  Benja- 

9  min,  twelve  thousand. — (9)  And  after  these  things, 
I  looked,  and  lo,  a  great  multitude,  which  no  one 
could  number,  from  all  kindreds,  and  nations,  and 
tribes,  and  tongues ;  who  stood  before  the  throne, 
and  before  the  Lamb,  clothed  in  white  robes,  and 

10  palms  in  their  hands ;  (10)  and  they  cried,  with  a 
loud  voice,  saying:  Salvation^  to  our  God,  to  him 

11  who  sitteth  on  the  throne,  and  to  the  Lamb.  (11) 
And  all  the  angels  stood  around  the  throne  and  the 
Elders  and  the  four  Animals ;  and  they  fell  upon 
their  faces  before  his  throne,  and  worshipped  God, 

12  (12)  saying:  Amen.  Blessing,  and  glory,  and 
Avisdom,  and  thanksgiving,  and  honor,  and  power, 
and  might,   [be]  to  our  God,  for  ever  and  ever : 

13  Amen.  (13)  And  one  of  the  Elders  turned,*'  and 
said  to  me :  These  who  are  clothed  in  white  robes, 

14  who  are  they,  and  whence  came  they  ?  (14)  And  I 
said  to  him :  My  lord,  thou  knowest.  And  he  said 
to  me :  These  are  they  who  came  from  great  afflic- 
tion ;  and  they  have  washed  their  robes,  and  made 

15  the.m  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  (15)  There- 
fore are  they  before  the  throne  of  God ;  and  they 
serve  him  day  and  night,  in  his  temple;  and  he 

16  who  sitteth  on  the  throne,  will  protect  them:.  (16) 
they  will  not  hunger,  nor  thirst  any  more;  nor 
will  the  sun  fall  on  them,  nor  any  heat.     (17)  Be- 

17  cause  the  Lamb,  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne, 
will  feed  them ;  and  will  lead  them  to  fountains  of 
living  water;  and  God  will  wipe  every  tear  from 
their  ej^es. 

VIII.  And  when  he  had  opened  the  seventh  seal,  there 
was  silence  in  heaven,  for  about   half  an   hour. 


Sy.  between 
ilieir  eyes. 


Sy.  ]j_D5as 


or,  answered. 


452 


APOCALYPSE,    VIII. 


Sy. 


^  or,  movements. 


c  Sy. 
Gr.  "A-j^ivaoi^. 


^  or,  was  ab- 
sorbed. 


2 


6 


(2)  And  I  saw  the  seven  angels,  who  stood  before 
God;    and  to  them  were  given,  seven   trumpets. 

(3)  And  another  angel  came  and  stood  by  the  al- 
tar; and  he  held  a  golden  censer:  and  much  incense 
was  given  him,  so  that  he  might  offer,^  with  the 
prayers  of  all  the  saints,  upon  the  golden  altar  be- 
fore the  throne.  (4)  And  the  smoke  of  the  incense 
of  the  prayers  of  the  saints  went  up  before  God, 
from  the  hand  of  the  angel.  (5)  And  the  angel 
took  the  censer,  and  filled  it  with  fire  from  the 
altar,  and  cast  it  upon  the  earth :  and  there  were 
thunders,  and  lightnings,  and  voices,  and  an  earth- 
quake.'' (6)  And  the  seven  angels,  who  had  the 
seven  trumpets,  prepared  themselves  to  sound. — 
(7)  And  the  first  sounded  ;  and  there  was  hail,  and 
fire,  which  were  mingled  with  water:  and  these 
were  thrown  upon  the  earth ;  and  a  third  part  of 
the  earth  was  burned  up,  and  a  third  part  of  the 
trees  were  burned,  and  all  green-  grass  was  burned. 
— (8)  And  the  second  angel  sounded,  and,  as  it 
were  a  great  mountain  burning  with  fire,  was  cast 
into  the  sea ;  and  also  a  third  part  of  the  sea  be- 
came blood.  (9)  And  a  third  part  of  all  the  crea- 
tures in  the  sea,  that  had  life,  died;  and  a,  third 
part  of  the  ships  were  destroyed. — (10)  And  the 
third  angel  sounded,  and  there  fell  from  heaven  a 
star,  burning  like  a  lamp  ;  and  it  fell  upon  a  third 
part  of  the  rivers,  and  upon  the  fountains  of  water. 
(11)  And  the  name  of  the  star  was  called  Worm- 
wood ;<=  and  a  third  part  of  the  waters  became 
wormwood ;  and  many  persons  died  from  the 
waters,  because  they  were  bitter. — (12)  And  the  12 
fourth  angel  sounded,  and  a  third  part  of  the  sun 
was  smitten,'!  and  the  third  part  of  the  moon,  and 
the  third  part  of  the  stars ;  so  that  the  third  part 

of  them  were  dark,  and  they  became  dark ;  and 
the  day  did  not  give  light  for  the  third  part  of  it, 
and  the  night  in  like  manner.  (13)  And  I  saw  and  13 
heard  an  eagle,  which  flew  in  the  midst,  and  it  had 
a  tail  of  blood,*  while  it  said,  with  a  loud  voice : 
Woe,  woe,  to  them  who  dwell  on  the  earth,  because 


9 


10 


11 


*  The  Greek  word  is,  fji,;(j'cijpav-/)/AaTi,  in  mid  heaven;  compounded  of  jxsVoff, 
middle,  and  ojpavo^,  heaven.  But  the  Syriac  transl.ator  supposed  it  to  be  a  com- 
pound of  jxirfoj  middle,  oupa  tail,  and  ai'fAa  blood;  and  he  rendered  it  accordingly. 


APOCALYPSE,  IX. 


453 


of  the  remaining  sounds  of  the  trumpets  of  the  three 
IX.angels,  who  are  to  sound. — (IX.)  And  the  fifth  an- 
gel sounded  ;  and  I  saw  a  star,  which  fell  from 
heaven  upon   the  earth.     And  there  was  given  to 

2  him  the  key  of  the  pit  of  the  abyss. "•  (2)  And  he 
opened  the  pit  of  the  abyss ;  and  smoke  issued  from 
the  pit,  like  the  smoke  of  a  furnace  that  is  in  blast; 
and  the  sun   and  the  air  were  darkened   by   the 

8  smoke  of  the  pit.  (3)  And  out  of  the  smoke,  came 
locusts  upon  the  earth  :  and  power  was  given  them, 

4  like  that  which  scorpions  have  on  the  earth.  (4) 
And  it  was  commanded  them,  that  they  should  not 
hurt  the  grass  of  the  earth,  nor  any  herb,  nor  any 
tree ;  but  [only]  the  persons,  who  had  not  the  seal 

5  of  God  upon  their  foreheads.  (5)  And  it  was  given 
them,  that  they  should  not  kill  them,  but  should 
torment  them  five  months :  and  their  torment  was 
like  the  torment  of  a  scorpion,  when  it  striketh  a 

6  person.  (6)  And  in  those  days,  men  will  desire 
death,  and  will  not  find  it;  and  they  will  long  to 

7  die,  and  death  will  fly  from  them.  (7)  And  the 
appearance  of  the  locusts  [was  this] ;  they  were  like 
the  appearance  of  horses  prepared  for  battle ;  and 
on  their  heads,  was,  as  it  were  a  coronet,  resembling 
gold  ;  and  their  faces  were  like  the  faces  of  men. 

8  (8)  And  they  had  hair,  like  the  hair  of  women: 

9  and  their  teeth  were  like  those  of  lions.  (9)  And 
they  had  breastplates,  like  breastplates  of  iron : 
and  the  sound  of  their  wings,  was  like  the  sound 
of  the  chariots  of  many  horses  rushing  into  battle. 

10  (10)  And  they  had  tails  like  those  of  scorpions,  and 
stings ;    and  with  their  tails  they  had  the  power 

11  of  hurting  men  five  months.  (11)  And  they  had 
a  king  over  them,  the  angel  of  the  abyss  ;  and  his 
name,  in  Hebrew,  is  Abaddon;'^  and  in  Greek,  his 

12  name  is  Apollyon.''     (12)  One  woe  is  past ;    lo, 

13  there-  come  yet  two  woes  after  them. — (13)  And 
the  sixth  angel  sounded ;  and  I  heard  a  voice  from 
the  horns  of  the  golden  altar  which  was  before  God, 

14  (14)  that  said  to  the  sixth  angel  having  a  trumpet: 
Loose  the  four  angels  that  are  bound  at  the  great 

15  river  Euphrates.  (15)  And  the  four  angels  were 
loosed;  who  are  prepared,  for  an  hour,  and  a  day, 
and  a  month,  and  a  year,  to  slay  the  third  part  of 

16  men.  (16)  And  the  number  of  the  warrior  horse- 
men was  two  myriads  of  myriads :    and  I  heard 


Sy.  "jlDocnZ. 


Sy.  Oj-rHL 
Sy.  ^\ng^] 


454 


APOCALYPSE,    X. 


or,  is  aboul  to. 


their  number.  (17)  And  while  I  looked  on  the 
horses  in  the  vision,  and  on  them  who  sat  on  them, 
[I  saw]  that  the  breastplates  were  of  fire,  and  of 
jacinth,  and  of  sulphur.  And  the  heads  of  the 
horses  were  like  the  heads  of  lions  ;  and  from  their 
mouths  issued  fire,  and  smoke,  and  sulphur.  (18) 
And  by  these  three  plagues,  a  third  part  of  the 
men  Avere  slain  ;  [namely,]  by  the  fire,  and  by  the 
smoke,  and  by  the  sulphur,  which  issued  from  their 
mouths.  (19)  For  the  power  of  the  horses  was  in 
their  mouth,  and  in  their  tails;  for  their  tails  were 
like  serpents,  having  heads  to  strike  with.  (20) 
And  the  residue  of  men  who  were  not  slain  by 
these  plagues,  repented  not  of  the  works  of  their 
hands,  so  as  not  to  worship  demons,  and  idols  of 
gold,  and  of  silver,  and  brass,  and  stone,  and  wood, 
which  cannot  see,  nor  hear.  (21)  And  they  re- 
pented not  of  their  murders,  nor  of  their  sorceries, 
nor  of  their  whoredom,  nor  of  their  thefts. 

And  I  saw  another  mighty  angel,  that  descended 
from  heaven,  clothed  with  a  cloud ;  and  a  cloud- 
bow  was  over  his  head,  and  his  face  was  like  the 
sun,  and  his  feet  like  pillars  of  fire.  (2)  x\nd  he 
had  in  his  hand  an  open  little  book :  and  he  placed 
his  right  foot  upon  the  sea,  and  his  left  upon  the 
land :  (3)  and  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  as  a  lion 
roareth  :  and  when  he  had  cried,  the  seven  thun- 
ders uttered  their  voices.  (4)  And  when  the  seven 
thunders  had  spoken,  I  was  about  to  write.  And 
I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven,  saying:  Seal  up  the 
things  which  the  seven  thunders  have  uttered,  and 
write  them  not.  (5)  And  the  angel  whom  I  saw 
standing  upon  the  sea  and  the  land,  raised  his 
right  hand  to  heaven,  (6)  and  swore,  by  him  who 
liveth  for  ever  and  ever,  who  created  heaven  and 
the  things  in  it,  and  the  earth  and  the  things  in  it, 
and  the  sea  and  the  things  in  it, — that  the  time 
should  be  no  longer ;  (7)  but,  in  the  days  of  the 
voice  of  the  seventh  angel,  when  he  shalh"^  sound, 
and  the  mystery  of  God  shall  be  consummated;  as 
he  announced  to  his  servants  the  prophets. — 
(8)  And  the  voice  which  I  heard  from  heaven, 
spoke  to  me  again,  and  said:  Go,  take  the  little 
open  book  in  the  hand  of  the  angel  that  standcth 
on  the  sea  and  on  the  land.     (D)  And  I  went  to 


17 


18 


19 

20 


21 


X. 


APOCALYPSE,  XL 


455 


the  angel,  telling  him  to  give  me  the  little  book. 
And  he  said  to  me,  Take,  and  eat  it :  and  it  will 
make  thy  bowels  bitter,  but  in  thy  mouth  it  will 

10  be  sweet  as  honey.  (10)  And  I  took  the  little 
book  from  the  hand  of  the  angel,  and  ate  it :  and  it 
was  in  my  mouth  sweet  like  honey :  and  when  I 

11  had  eaten  it,  my  bowels  were  bitter.  (11)  And 
he  said  to  me,  Thou  must  again  prophesy  upon'' 
many  nations,  and  peoples,  and  princes,  and  kings. 

XI. — (XL)  And  a  reed  was  given  to  me,  like  a  rod ; 
and  the  angel  stood,  saying.  Arise,  and  measure  the 
temple  of  God,  and  the  altar, a-  and  them  that  wor- 

2  ship  therein.  (2)  But  the  court  which  is  without 
the  temple,  leave  out,  and  measure  it  not ;  because 
it  is  given  to  the  Gentiles ;  and  they  will  tread  down 

3  the  holy  city  forty  and  two  months.  (3)  And  I 
will  give  my  two  witnesses ;  and  they  will  proph- 
esy a  thousand  and  two  hundred  and  sixty  days, 

4  clothed  in  sackcloth.  (4)  These  are  the  two  olive- 
trees,  and  tlie  two  candlesticks  which  stand  before 

5  the  Lord  of  the  earth.  (5)  And  if  any  person  will 
harm  them,  fire  cometh  out  of  their  mouth,  and 
consameth  their  adversary ;    and  if  any  one  will 

6  harm  them,  thus  must  he  be  slain.  (6)  They  have 
power  to  shut  up  heaven,  so  that  the  rain  shall 
not  fall  in  those  days :  and  they  have  power  over 
the  waters,  to  turn  them  into  blood ;  and  to  smite 
the  earth  with  all  plagues,  as  often  as  they  please. 

7  (7)  And  when  they  shall  have  completed  their  tes- 
timony, the  beast  of  prey  that  came  up  from  the 
abyss,  will  make  war  upon  them,  and  will  over- 

8  come  them.  (8)  And  their  dead  bodies  [will  be] 
in  the  open  street  of  that  great  city,  which  is  spirit- 
ually called  Sodom  and  Egypt,  where  also  their 

9  Lord  was  crucified.  (9)  And  [they]''  of  the  nations 
and  tribes  and  peoples  and  tongues,  will  look  upon 
their  dead  bodies,  three  days  and  a  half;  and  will 
not  suffer  their  dead  bodies  to  be  laid  in  the  grave. 

10  (10)  And  they  who  dwell  on  the  earth  will  rejoice 
over  them,  and  will  be  merry,  and  will  send  pres- 
ents to  one  another ;  because  those  two  prophets 

11  tormented  them  who  dwell  on  the  earth.  (11)  And 
after  these  three  days  and  a  half,  the  spirit  of  life 
from  God  entered  into  them,  and  they  stood  upon 
their  feet:  and  great  fear  fell  on  those  who  saw 

12  them.     (12)  And  they^  heard  a  great  voice  from 


Sy.^ 


i.  e.  the  irmer 
court. 


•>  or,  some. 


Some  copies: 
/  heard. 


456 


APOCALYPSE,    XII. 


or,  movement. 


or,  movement.. 


sy.  r,  z 


k^ 


heaven,  which  said  to  them :  Come  up  hither. 
And  they  ascended  to  heaven  in  a  cloud;  and  their 
enemies  saw  them.  (13)  And  in  tlie  same  hour  13 
there  was  a  great  earthquake,'^  and  the  tenth  part 
of  the  city  fell :  and  the  persons  killed  in  the  earth- 
quake, were  seven  thousand  names:  and  they  who 
remained  were  afraid,  and  gave  glory  to  God. — 
(14)  The  second  woe  is  passed :  behold,  the  third  14 
woe  cometh  quickly. 

And  the  seventh  angel  sounded ;  and  there  were  15 
voices  and  thunders,  which  said:  The  kingdom  of 
the  world  hath  become  [the  kingdom]  of  our  Lord 
and  of  his  Messiah  ;  and  he  will  reign  for  ever  and 
ever.     (16)  And  the  twenty  and  four  Elders,  who  16 
are  before  the  throne  of  God,  [and]  who  sit  upon 
their  seats,  fell  upon  their  faces,  and  worshipped 
God,  (17)  saying:  We  praise  thee,  0  Lord  God,  17 
Omnipotent,  who  art,  and  wast ;  because  thou  hast 
assumed  thy  great  power,  and  hast  reigned.     (18)  18 
x\nd  the  nations  were  angry ;  and  thy  anger  is 
come,  and  the  time  of  the  dead,  that  they  should  be 
judged:  and  that  thou  shouldst  give  a  reward  to 
thy  servants,  the  prophets,  and  the  saints,  and  to 
them  that  fear  thy  name,  the  small  and  the  great ; 
and  that  thou  shouldst  destroy  them  who  destroyed 
the  earth. 

And  the  temple  of  God  in  heaven  was  opened ;  19 
and  the  ark  of  his  covenant  was  seen  in  his  temple: 
and  there  were  lightnings,  and  thunders,  and  voices, 
and  an  earthquake,^  and  great  hail. — (XII.)  And  XII. 
a  great  wonder  was   seen  in    heaven ;    a  woman 
clothed  with  the  sun,  and  the  moon  under  her  feet, 
and  on  her  head  a  coronet  of  twelve  stars.    (2)  And,     2 
being  with  child,  she  cried,  and  travailed,  and  had 
the   pangs  of  bringing  forth.     (3)  And  there  ap-     3 
peared  another  wonder  in  heaven;  and  lo,  a  great 
lierj'-  dragon,  which  had  seven  heads  and  ten  horns, 
and  upon  his  head  seven  diadems.*     (4)  And  his    4 
tail  drew  along  the  third  part  of  the  stars  of  heaven, 
and  cast  them  on  the  earth.     And  the  dragon  was 
standing  beibre  the  woman,  who  was  about  to  bring 
forth,  so  that;  when    she  should    bring  forth,  he 
might  devour  her  child.     (5)    And  she    brought     5 
forth  a  male  child,  who  was  to  rule  all  nations  with 
a  rod  of  iron.     And  her  child  was  caught  up  to  God 
and  to  his  throne.     (6)  And  the  woman  lied  into     6 


APOCALYPSE,    XIII. 


45^ 


the  wilderness,  where  she  had  a  place  which  was 
prepared  for  her  by  God  ;  so  that  thej^  might 
nourish  her  there  a  thousand  and  two  hundred  and 

7  sixty  days, — (7)  And  there  was  war  in  heaven: 
Michael  and  his  angels  fought  against  the  dragon ; 

8  and  the  dragon  and  his  angels  fought,  (8)  and 
prevailed  not;  nor  was  their  place  found  any  more 

9  in  heaven.  (9)  And  the  great  dragon  was  cast 
out,  the  old  serpent,  who  is  called  the  Deceiver,  and 
Satan,  who  seduceth  all  the  inhabited  world:  he 
was  cast  upon  the  earth,  and  his  angels  were  cast 

10  out  with  him.  (10)  And  I  heard  a  great  voice  in 
heaven,  which  said  :  Now  is  there  deliverance,  and 
the  power  and  the  kingdom  of  our  God,  and  the 
dominion  of  his  Messiah :  because  the  Accuser  of 
our  brethren  is  cast  out,  who  accused  them  day  and 

11  night  before  our  God.  (11)  And  they  overcame 
him,  because^  of  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  be- 
cause of  the  word  of  their  testimony :    and  they 

12  loved  not  their  life,  even  to  death,  (12)  Therefore, 
be  joyful,  0  heaven,  and  ye  that  dwell  there.  Woe 
to  the  earth,  and  to  the  sea  ;  for  the  Deceiver  hath 
come  down  to  you,  being  in  great  wrath  since  he 

13  knoweth  that  his  time  is  short. — (13)  And  when 
the  dragon  saw  that  he  was  cast  out  upon  the  earth, 
he  persecuted  the  woman  who  brought  forth  the 

li  male  child.  (14)  And  to  the  woman  were  given 
the  two  wings  of  the  great  eagle,  that  she  mightily 
into  the  wilderness,  to  her  place ;  where  she  is 
nourished  a  time'^  and  times  and  half  a  time,  from 

15  the  face  of  the  serpent.  (15)  And  the  serpent 
ejected  from  his  mouth  waters  like  a  river,  after  the 
woman,  that  he  might  cause  her  to  be  carried  away 

16  by  the  flood.  (16)  And  the  earth  helped  the 
woman  :  and  the  earth  opened  its  mouth,  and  drank 
up  the   flood  which  the  serpent  ejected  from  his 

17  mouth.  (17)  And  the  dragon  was  enraged  against 
the  woman ;  and  he  went  to  make  war  upon  the 
residue  of  her  seed,  who  keep  the  commandments 

18  of  God,  and  have  the  testimony  of  Jesus,  (18)  And 
he  stood  on  the  sand  of  the  sea, 

XIII,  And  I  saw  a  beast  of  prey^  come  up  from  the  sea, 

having  ten  horns,  and  seven  heads ;  and  upon  his 

horns  ten  diadems,  and  upon  his  heads  names  of 

2  blasphemy,     (2)     And  the  beast  of  prey  which  I 


•'  Sy.  ^^.^ 


Sy.  ]JA 


^  Sy.  of  tooth. 


458 


APOCALYPSE,    XIII. 


Sy.  ]:^i 


Sy-Uoll 


^  Sy.  'U'OJ, 

a  spirit. 


Sy.  ]^n  •o3 


saw,  was  like  a  leopard ;  and  his  feet  like  [those] 
of  a  wolf,''  and  hi5  mouth  like  the  mouth  of  lions: 
and  the  dragon  gave  to  him  his  own  power  and  his 
throne,  and  great  authority.     (3)  And  one  of  his     3 
heads  was  wounded  as  it  were  to  death ;  and  his 
deadly    wound   was   healed.      And   all  the  earth 
wondered  after  the  beast  of  prey.     (4)  And  they     4 
worshipped  the  dragon,  because  he  had  given  au- 
thority to  this  beast  of  prey;  and  [they  said],  who 
can  make  war  upon  him?  (o)  And  there  was  given     5 
to  him  a  mouth  s^Deaking  great  things,  and  blasphe- 
mies :  and  authority  was  given  him  to  operate  forty 
and  two  months.     (6)  And  he  opened  his  mouth     6 
in  blasphemy  towards  God,  lo  blaspheme  his  name, 
and  his  tabernacle,  and  them  who  dwell  in  heaven. 
(7)  And  authority  was  given  him  over  every  tribe     7 
and  people  and  tongue  and  nation :  and  it  was 
given  him  to  wage  war  with  the  saints,  and  to 
overcome  them.     (8)  And  all  that  dwell  on  the     8 
earth,  whose  names  are  not  written  in  the  book  of 
life  of  the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world,  will  worship  him.     (9)  If  any  one  hath  ears,     9 
let  him  hear.     (10)  If  [any  one]  carricth  into  cap-  10 
tivity,  he  shall  himself  go  into  captivity;  and  if 
any  one  slayeth  with  the  sword,  he  must  be  slain 
with  the  sword :  here  is  the  patience  and  the  faith 
of  the  saints. — (11)  And  I  saw  another  beast  of  11 
prey,  which  came  out  of  the  earth ;   and  he  had 
two  horns  like  those  of  a  lamb,  and  he  spoke  like 
the  dragon.     (12)  And  before  him  he  exercised  all  12 
the  autliority   of  the  first  beast  of  prey,  whose 
deadly  wound  was  healed,     (13)  And  he  wrought  13 
great  signs, <=  even  so  as  to  make  fire  come  down 
from  heaven   upon  the  earth,  before  men.     (14)  14 
And  he  seduced  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth,  to 
erect  an  image  to  the  beast  of  prey  who  had  the 
wound  from  a  sword  and  recovered.  .  (15)  And  it  15 
was  given  him  to  put  life'^  into  the  image  of  the 
beast  of  prey;    and  to  cause  that  all  they  who 
would  not  worship  the  image  of  the  beast  of  prey, 
should  be  slain:  (16)  and  to  cause  that  all,  great  16 
and  small,  rich  and  poor,  bond  and  free,  should  re- 
ceive a  mark'^  on  their  right  hands,  or  upon  their 
fjreheads;  (17)  so  that  no  one  might  be  able  to  17 
buy  or  to  sell,  except  those  who  had  the  mark  of 
the  name  of  the  beast  of  prey,  or  the  number  of  his 


APOCALYPSE,  XIV. 


459 


18  name.  (18)  Here  is  wisdom :  let  him  that  hatli  in- 
telligence/ compute  the  number  of  the  beast  of 
prey ;  for  it  is  the  number  of  a  man :  and  its  num- 
ber is  six  hundred  and  sixty  and  six. 

XIV.  And  I  looked,  and  behold,  a  Lamb  stood  on 
mount  Zion ;  and  with  him  the  number  of  a  hun- 
dred and  forty  and  four  thousand,  having  his  name 
and  tlie  name  of  his  Father  written  upon  their 

2  foreheads.  (2)  And  I  heard  a  sound  from  heaven, 
as  the  sound  of  many  waters,  and  as  the  sound  of 
great  thunder;  and  the  sound  which  I  heard,  was 

8  like  that  of  harpers  striking  on  their  harps.  (3) 
And  they  sang  a  new  song  before  the  throne,  and 
before  the  four  Animals  and  the  Elders:  and 
no  one  was  able  to  learn  that  song,  except  the 
hundred  and  forty  and  four  thousand  who  were 

4  redeemed  from  the  earth.  (4)  These  are  they  who 
have  not  defiled  themselves  with  women,  for  they 
are  virgins.  These  are  they  who  followed  the 
Lamb,  whithersoever  he  went.  These  have  been 
redeemed  by  Jesus  from  among  men,  the  first  fruits 

5  to  God  and  the  Lamb.  (5)  And  in  their  mouth 
was  found,  no  falsehood ;  for  they  are  without  faults. 

6  ■ — (6)  And  I  saw  another  angel  flying  in  heaven : 
and  with  blood,  he  had  the  everlasting  gospel,  to 
proclaim   to  dwellers  on  the  earth,  and  to  every 

7  nation  and  tribe  and  tongue  and  people ;  (7)  saying 
with  a  loud  voice.  Worship  God,  and  give  glory 
to  him ;  because  the  hour  of  his  judgment  is  come ; 
and  adore  ye  Him,  who  made  heaven  and  earth, 

8  and  the  sea,  and  the  fountains  of  water.  (8)  And 
another,  a  second  angel  followed  him,  saj'ing: 
Fallen,  fallen  is  Babvlon^  the  great,  which  made 
all  nations  drink  of  the  wine  of  tlie  rage  of  her 

9  whoredom.  (9)  And  another,  a  third  angel  follow- 
ed them,  saying  with  a  loud  voice:  If  any  man 
shall  worship  the  beast  of  prey  and  its  image,  and 
shall  receive  its  mark  upon  his  forehead  or  on  his 

10  hand,  (10)  he  also  shall  drink  of  the  wine  of  the 
wrath  of  God,  which  is  poured  undiluted'^  into  the 
cup  of  his  indignation,  and  shall  be  tormented  with 
fire  and  sulphur,  before  the  holy  angels,  and  be- 
fore the  throne.     (11)  And  the  smoke  of  their  tor- 

11  ment  ascendeth  up  for  ever  and  ever;  and  there  is 
no  rest,  by  day  or  by  night,  to  those  that  worship 


Sy.  "IjoOI 


Sy  A\^^ 


'Sy. 


V    ., 
Gr.  ccj 


460 


APOCALYPSE,    XV. 


or,  viniage- 
knife. 


sy.]:i 


worlds,  or 


i.  e.  the  holy 
of  holies. 


12 


13 


14 


15 

16 
17 

l5 


19 


the  beast  of  prey  and  its  image.  (12)  Here  is  the 
patience  of  the  saints,  who  keep  the  commandments 
of  God,  and  the  faith  of  Jesus.  (13)  And  I  heard 
a  voice  from  heaven,  saying:  Write,  Blessed  are 
the  "dead  that  die  in  the  Lord,  henceforth :  yes,  saith 
the  Spirit,  that  they  may  rest  from  their  toils;  for 
their  deeds  do  accompany  them. — (14)  And  I 
looked,  and  lo,  a  white  cloud;  and  upon  the 
cloud  sat  one  who  was  like  the  Son  of  man ;  and 
on  his  head  was  a  crown  of  gold,  and  in  his  hand  a 
sharp  sickle.  (15)  And  another  angel  came  out  of 
the  temple,  crying  with  a  loud  voice,  to  him  that 
sat  on  the  cloud.  (16)  And  he  thrust  his  sickle 
over  the  earth;  and  the  earth  was  reaped.  (17) 
And  another  angel  came  out  of  the  temple  that  is 
in  heaven,  having  also  a  sharp  sickle. <=  (18)  And 
another  angel  came  out  from  the  altar,  having  au- 
thority over  fire.  And  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice, 
to  him  who  had  the  sharp  sickle,  saying:  Thrust 
in  thy  sickle  which  is  sharp,  and  gather  the  clusters 
of  the  vineyard  of  the  earth,  because  the  grapes  of 
the  earth  are  ripe.  (19)  And  the  angel  thrust  in 
his  sickle  on  the  earth,  and  gathered  the  vintage  of 
the  earth,  and  cast  [it]  into  the  wine-press  of  the 
wrath  of  the  great  God.  (20)  And  the  wine-press  20 
was  trodden,  up  to  the  horses'  bridles,  for  a  thou- 
sand and  six  hundred  furlongs. 

And  I  saw  another  prodigy^  in  heaven,  great  XV. 
and  wonderful ;  seven  angels,  having  seven  plagues, 
the  last  in  order,  because  with  them  the  wrath  of 
God  is  consummated.     (2)  And  I  saw  as  it  were,  a     2 
sea  of  glass  mixed  with  fire :  and  they,  who  had 
been  victorious  over  the  beast  of  prey,  and  over  its 
image,  and  over  the  number   of  its   name,    were 
standing  on  the  sea  of  glass;    and  they  had  the 
harps  of  God.  (3)  And  they  sing  the  song  of  Moses     3 
the  servant  of  God,  and  the  song  of  the  Lamb, 
saying:  Great  and  marvellous  are  thy  deeds,  Lord 
God   Almighty;    just  and    true  are  thy   ways,  O 
King  of  worlds.''     (4)  Who  shall  not  fear  tliee,  O     4 
Lord,  and  glorify  thy  name?     Because  thou  only 
art  holy  and  just:  Because  all  nations  shall  come 
and  worship  before  thee,  since  thy  righteousnesses 
have  been  revealed. — (5)  And  after  this  I  beheld,     5 
and  the  temple'^  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  testimony  in 


APOCALYPSE,  XVI. 


461 


6  heaven,  was  opened.  (6)  And  tbe  seven  angels  who 
had  the  seven  phigues,  went  forth  from  the  temple, 
clothed  in  clean  splendid  linen,  and  girded  about 

7  their  breast  with  girdles  of  gold.  (7)  And  one  of 
the  four  Animal's  gave  to  those  seven  angels  seven 
cups'i  of  gold,  full  of  the  wrath  of  God  who  liveth 

8  for  ever  and  ever.  (8)  And  the  temple  was  filled 
with  smoke,  from  the  glory  of  God  and  from  his 
power  ;  and  no  one  was  able  to  enter  the  temple, 
until  the  seven  plagues  of  the  seven  angels  were 
accomplished. 

XVI.  And  I  heard  a  voice,  which  said  to  the  seven 
angels :  Go  forth,  and  pour  those  seven  cups  of  the 

2  wrath  of  God  upon  the  earth. — (2)  And  the  first 
went,  and  poured  his  cup  upon  the  earth ;  and  there 
was  a  malignant  and  jjainfid  ulcer  upon  those  men 
who  had  the  mark  of  the  beast  of  pre}^,  and  who 

3  worshipped  its  image. — (3)  And  the  second  angel 
poured  his  cup  upon  the  sea ;  and  it  became  blood, 
like  that  of  a  dead  person ;  and  every  living  soul 

4  of  things  in  the  sea,  died. — (4)  And  the  third  angel 
poured  his  cup  upon  the  rivers  and  the  fountains 

5  of  water ;  and  they  became  blood.  (5)  And  I 
heard  the  angel  of  tlie  waters  say :  Righteous  art 
thou,  who  art  and  who  wast,  and  art  holy ;  because 

6  thou  hast  done  this  judgment.  (6)  For  they  have 
shed  the  blood  of  saints  and  prophets;  and  thou 
hast  given  them  blood  to  drink,  for  they  deserve  it. 

7  (7)  And  I  heard  [one  from]  the  altar^  say:  Yes, 
Lord  God  Almighty:   true  and  righteous  is  thy 

8  judgment.  (8)  And  the  fourth  poured  his  cup 
upon  the  sun:  and  it  was  permitted  him, ^  to  scorch 

9  men  with  fire.  (9)  And  men  were  scorched  with 
great  heat;  and'men  blasphemed  the  name  of  God, 
who  hath  authority  over  these  plagues ;  and  they 

10  repented  not,  to  give 'glory  to  him. — (10)  And  the 
fifth  poured  his  cup  on  the  throne  of  the  beast  of 
prey ;  and  his  kingdom  became  darkness ;  and  they 

11  gnawed  their  tongues,  from  pain ;  (11)  and  they 
blasphemed  the  God  of  heaven,  on  account  of  their 
pains  and  their  ulcers,  and  did  not  repent  of  their 

12  deeds. — (12)  x\nd  the  sixth  poured  his  cup  upon 
the  great  river  Euphrates;*'  and  its  waters  dried  up, 
so  that  a  way  might  be  prepared  for  the  kings 

13  from  the  rising  of  the  sun.     (13)  And  I  saw  [issu- 


Gr.  (piaXag. 


Sy. 


or,  it. 


Sy.  2^ 


462 


APOCALYPSE,    XVII. 


^Sy.UoH 


Sy. 


"^■K 


I'-o'y] 


Sy.  ]mn 


ing]  from  the  moutli  of  the  dragon,  and  from  the 
mouth  of  the  beast  of  prey,  and  from  the  mouth  of 
the  false  prophet,  three  unclean  spirits  like  frogs : 
(14)  (for  they  are  the  spirits  of  demons,  who  Avork  14 
prodigies  j'J)  and  they  go  forth  to  all  the  kings  of 
all  the  halDitable  world,  to  gather  them  to  the  battle 
of  the  great  day  of  God  Almighty.     (15)  (And  lo,  15 
I  come  as  a  thief     Blessed  is  he  that  watcheth, 
and  keepeth  his  garments;  lest  he  walk  naked,  and 
they  see  his  shame.)  (16)  And  they  collected  them  16 
together  in  a  place  called,  in  Ilebrew,  Armaged- 
don.^ — (17)  And  the  seventh  poured  his  cup  on  17 
the  air ;  and  there  issued  a  loud  voice  from  the 
temple,  from  the  throne,  which  said :  It  is  done ! 
(18)  And  there  were  lightnings,  and  thunders,  and  18 
voices;  and  there  Avas  a  great  earthquake,  the  like 
of  which  there  v.'as  never,  since  men  were  on  the 
earth,  such  an  earthquake,  and  so  great.  (19)  And  19 
the  great  city  became  three  parts.     And  the  city 
of  the  nations  fell ;  and  Babylon  the  great  was 
remembered  before  God,  to  give  her  the  cup  of 
the  wine  of  the  heat  of  his  wrath.      (20)    And  20 
every  island  fled  away ;  and  the  mountains  Avcre 
not  found.     (21)  And   a   great   hail,  as   it   were  21 
of  a  talent  weight,  fell  from  heaven  upon  men: 
and  the  men  blasphemed  God,  on  account  of  the 
plague  of  hail ;  for  the  plague  of  it  Avas  very  great. 

Then  came  one  of  the  seven  angels  Avho  have  XVII. 
the  seven  cups,  and  talked  with  me,  saying :  Come, 
I  Avill  show  thee  the  judgment  of  the  great  harlot, 
who  sitteth  upon  many  Avaters ;  (2)  Avith  Avhom  the     2 
kings  of  the  earth  have  practised  Avhoredom,  and 
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  have  been  inebriated 
with  the  Avine  of  her  Avhoredom.     (8)  And  he  led     3 
me  in  spirit  into  the  Avilderness:  and  I  saAV  a  Avom- 
an  sitting  on  a  red  beast  of  prey,  Avhich  Avas  full 
of  names  of  blasphemy,  and  had  seven  heads  and 
ten  horns.      (4)  And  the  Avoman  Avas  clothed  in     4 
purple  and  scarlet,  and  gilded  Avith  gold,  and  pre- 
cious stones,  and  pearls ;  and  she  had  a  cup^  of  gold 
in  her  hand,  Avhich  Avas  full  of  the  pollutions  and 
impurity  of  her  Avhoredoms  of  the  earth.     (5)  And     5 
upon  her  forehead  Avas  the  name  Avritten :    Mys- 
tery:   Babylon  the  great;   the  jNIother  of  Harlots, 
and  of  the  contaminations  of  the  Earth.     (6)  And     6 


APOCALYPSE,    XVIII. 


463 


I  saw  that  the  woman  was  intoxicated  with  the 
blood  of  the  saints,  and  with  the  blood  of  the  wit- 
nesses^  of  Jesus.     And  when  I  saw  her,  I  wondered 

7  with  great  amazement. — (7)  And  the  Angel  said 
to  me.  Why  dost  thou  wonder  ?  I  will  tell  thee  the 
mystery  of  the  woman,  and  of  the  beast  of  prej 
that  beareth  her,  which  hath  the  seven  heads  and 

8  the  ten  horns.  (8)  The  beast  of  prey  which  thou 
sawest,  was,  and  is  not ;  and  he  will  ascend  from 
the  abyss  and  go  into  perdition :  and  the  dwellers 
on  the  earth,  whose  names  are^  not  written  in  the 
book  of  life  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,  will 
wonder  when  they  see  the  beast  of  prey,  which 

9  was,  and  is  not,  and  approacheth.  (9)  Here  is  in- 
telligence, for  him  who  hath  wisdom.  Those  seven 
heads  are   the   seven   mountains,^  on  which  the 

10  woman  sitteth.  (10)  And  there  are  seven  kings : 
of  whom  five  have  fallen,  one  exists,  and  the  other 
hath  not  yet  come ;  and  when  he  cometh  he  must 

11  continue  for  a  short  time.  (11)  And  the  beast  of 
prey,  which  was  and  is  not,  is  the  eighth,  and  is 

12  from  the  seven,  and  is  for  perdition.  (12)  xind  the 
ten  horns  which  thou  sawest,  are  ten  kings.  These 
persons  have  not  yet  received  royalty ;  but  they 
receive  authority,  as  if  kings,  with  the  beasts  of 

13  prey,  for  one  hour.  (13)  They  have  one  mind  •,^ 
and  they  will  give  their  power  and  authority  unto 

14  the  beast  of  prey.  (14)  They  will  make  war  upon 
the  Lamb ;  and  the  Lamb  will  vanquish  them ; 
because  he  is  Lord  of  lords,  and  King  of  kings,  and 
those  with  him  [are]  called  and  chosen  and  faithful. 

15  (15)  And  he  said  to  me:  The  waters  which  thou 
sawest,  where  the  harlot  sitteth,  are  peoples,  and 

16  multitudes,  and  nations,  and  tongues.  (16)  And 
the  ten  horns  which  thou  sawest,  and  the  beast  of 
prey,  will  hate  the  harlot ;  and  they  will  make  her 
desolate  and  naked,  and  will  eat  her  flesh,  and 

17  burn  her  Avith  fire.  (17)  For  God  hath  put  into 
their  hearts,  to  do  his  pleasure,  ^  and  to  execute  one 
purpose,  and  to  give  their  kingdom  to  the  beast  of 
prey,  until  these  words  of  God  shall  be  fulfilled. 

18  (18)  And  the  woman  whom  thou  sawest,  is  the 
great  city,?  which  hath  dominion  over  the  kings  of 
the  earth. 

XYIII.   After  these  things,  I  saw  another  angel  come 


or,  martyrs. 


Sy. 


gy-lW 


Sy.  U_iL£i^, 

or,  tuill. 


Sy, 


Sy 


464 


APOCALYPSE,    XVIII. 


Sy.  U5c4j 


''  Sy.  adhered  to. 


Sy.  duplicate 
to  her  double. 


down  from  heaven ;  and  he  had  great  authority, 
and  the  earth  was  illumined  by  his  glory.    (2)  And     2 
he  cried  with  a  strong  voice,  saying:  Fallen,  fallen, 
is  Babylon  the  great:  and  hath  become  a  cavern 
of  demons,  and  the  home'^  of  every  unclean  spii'it, 
and  the  home  of  every  unclean  and  hateful  bird, 
and  the  home  of  every  unclean  and  hateful  beast 
of  prey.     (3)  For  all  the  nations  have  drunken  of     3 
the  wine  of  her  wrath  ;  and  the  kings  of  the  earth 
have  practiced  whoredom  with  her ;  and  the  mer- 
chants of  the  earth   have  been  enriched  by  the 
abundance   of   her    luxuries. — (4)    And  I   heard     4 
another  voice  from  heaven,  saying:  Come  ye  out 
of  her,  my  people ;  that  ye  may  not  participate  in 
her  sins,   and  may  not   partake  of  her   plagues. 
(5)  For  her  sins  have  reached''  up  to  heaven ;  and     5 
God  hath  rememberod  her  iniquities.     (6)  Recom-     G 
pensc  ye  to  her,  as  she  also  hath  recompensed ;  and 
render  to  her  double,c  according  to  her  deeds ;  in 
the  cup  which  she  hath  mixed,  mix  ye  to  her  two- 
fold.    (7)  As   much  as  she  pleased  herself  with     7 
lasciviousness,  so  much  of  anguish  and  sorrow  give 
ye  to  her.     Because  she  saith  in  her  heart,  I  sit  a 
queen,  and  am  no  widow,  and  I  shall  see  no  sor-  . 
row;  (8)  therefore,  in  one   day,   shall   these   her     8 
plagues  come,  death,  and  mourning,  and  famine ; 
and  she  shall  be  burned  .with  fire  :  for  strong  is  the 
Lord  God  who  judge th  her. — (9)  And  the  kings     9 
of  the  earth  who  committed  whoredom  and  were 
lascivious  with  her,  shall  weep,  and  mourn,  and  be- 
wail her,  when  they  shall  see  the  smoke  of  her 
burning,  (10)  standing  afar  off,  from  fear  of  her  10 
torment,  [and]  saying,  Alas,  alas !  that  great  city 
Babylon,  that  powerful  city ;  for  in  one  hour  is  thy 
judgment  come!     (11)  And  the  merchants  of  the  11 
earth  will  mourn  over  her,  because  no  one  pur- 
chaseth  their  cargo ;  (12)  no  more,  the  cargo  of  12 
gold,  and  silver,  and  precious  stones,  and  pearls, 
and  fine  linen,  and  purple,  and  silk,  and  scarlet, 
and  every  aromatic  wood,  and  all  vessels  of  ivory, 
and    all  vessels    of  very  precious  wood,   and  of 
brass,  and  of  iron,  and  of  marble,  (13)  and  cinna-  13 
mon,  and  amomum,  and  aromatics,  and  unguents, 
and  frankincense,  and  wine,  and  oil,  and  fine  flour, 
and  wheat,  and  beasts  of  burden,  and  sheep,  and 
horses,  and  chariots,  and  the  bodies  and  souls  of 


APOCALYPSE,  XIX. 


465 


14  men.  (14)  And  the  fruits  which  thy  soul  desired, 
have  departed  from  thee ;  and  all  things  delicious 
and  splendid  have  perished  from  thee;  and  the 

15  traders  in  them  shall  obtain  them  no  more.  (15) 
And  they  who  were  enriched  from  her,  will  stand 
afar  off,  for  fear  of  her  torment ;  and  will  weep  and 

16  mourn,  (16)  saying :  Alas,  alas !  that  great  city, 
which  was  clothed  in  fine  linen,  and  purple,  and 
scarlet,  and  gilded  with  gold,  and  precious  stones, 
and   pearls ;    because,   in   one   hour,    such   riches 

17  are  laid  waste.  (17)  And  every  pilot,  and  every 
navigator  to  the  place,  and  the  sailors,  and  all  who 

18  do  business  by  sea,  stood  afar  off,  (18)  and  cried, 
when  they  saw  the  smoke  of  her  burning,  saying : 

19  What  [other]  is  like  this  great  city !  "(19)  And 
they  cast  dust  on  their  heads,  and  cried,  weeping, 
and  mourning,  and  saying :  Alas,  alas  !  that  great 
city,  in  which  all  that  have  ships  in  the  sea  became 
rich,  by  her  preciousness  ;  for  in  one  hour  she  hath 

20  become  desolate. — (20)  Eejoice  over  her,  0  heaven, 
and  ye  Angels,  and  Legates,  and  Prophets ;  because 

21  God  judgeth  your  causc^  with  her. — (21)  And  an 
angel  took  up  a  stone  like  a  great  millstone,  and 
cast  it  into  the  sea,  saying :  So  shall  Babylon,  the 
great  city,  be  thrown  down  with  violence,  and  shall 

22  no  more  be  found :  (22)  and  the  voice  of  harpers 
and  musicians  and  pipers  and  trumpeters;  shall  no 
more  be  heard  in  thee ;  and  no  artificer  of  any 

23  trade,  shall  be  found  any  more  in  thee.  (23)  x^nd 
the  light  of  a  candle,  shall  not  be  seen  in  thee ; 
and  the  voice  of  a  bridegroom  and  bride,  shall  no 
more  be  heard  in  thee  :  foi  thy  merchants  were  the 
great  men  of  the  earth,  because  all  nations  were 

24  seduced  by  thy  sorceries.  (24)  And  in  her  was 
found  the  blood  of  prophets  and  saints,  and  of  all 
those  that  have  been  slain  on  the  earth. 

XIX.    And  after  these  things,  I  heard  a  loud  voice  of 

a  great  multitude  in  heaven,  saying  :  Hallelujah  :^ 

Deliverance,  and  strength,  and  glory,  and  honor, 

2  unto  our  God :  (2)  for,  true  and  righteous  are  his 

judgments ;  for  he  hath  judged  that  great  harlot, 

who  corrupted  the  earth  with  her  whoredom ;  and 

hath  avenged  the  blood  of  his  servants  at  her  hand. 

8  (3)    And  again   they  said:    Hallelujah:    and  her 

4  smoke  ascendeth  up  for  ever  and  ever.     (4)  And 

30 


^  Sy.  judgment. 


Sy.  "jjQ-lLai 


^6Q 


APOCALYPSE,  XIX. 


Sy.  IL?! 


Sy.  1A\Ld 


the  twenty-four  Elmers  fell   down,  and  tlie  four 
Animals,  and  worshipped  God  who  sitteth  on  the 
throne,  saying  :  Amen  :  Ilallelujah  !      (5)  And  a    5 
voice  came  forth  from  the  throne,  saying:  Praise 
our  God,  all  ye  his  servants ;  and  such  as  fear  him, 
small  and  great.     (6)  And  I  heard,  as  it  were  the     6 
voice  of  a  great  multitude,  and  as  the  voice  of  many 
waters,  and  as  the  voice  of  heavy  thunders,  saying : 
Hallelujah ;  for  our  Lord  God,  Omnipotent,  reign- 
eth,     (7)  Let  us  rejoice  and  exult,  and  give  glory     7 
to  him :  for  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb  hath 
come,    and   his   bride   hath   made   herself  ready. 
(8)  And  it  was  granted  her  to  be  clothed  in  fine     8 
linen,  bright  and  clean :  for  fine  linen  is  the  righ- 
teousnesses'' of  the  saints. — (9)  And  he  said  to  me,  '"'9 
Write ;  Blessed  are  they  who  are  called  to  the  sup- 
per of  the  marriage  feast  of  the  Lamb.     And  he 
said  to  me.  These  my  [sayings]  are  the  true  words 
of  God.     (10)  And  I  fell  at  his  feet,  to  worship  10 
him.     And  he  said  to  me.  See,  [thou  do  it]  not ; 
I  am  thy  fellow-servant,  and  of  those  thy  brethren 
who  have  the  testimony  of  Jesus.     Worship  ye 
God :  for  the  testimony  of  Jesus  is  the  spirit  of 
prophecy. 

And   I  saw  heaven  opened :    and  lo,   a  white  11 
horse ;  and  he  that  sat  on  it,  is  called  Faithful  and 
True :  and  in  righteousness  he  judgeth,  and  maketh 
war.     (12)  llis  eyes  [were]  like  a  flame  of  fire,  and  12 
on  his  head  [were]   many  diadems;    and  he  had 
names  inscribed  ;  and  the  name  which  was  written 
on  him,  no  one  knew,  except  himself.     (13)  And  13 
he   was   clothed   with    a  vesture   sprinkled   with 
blood;  and  his  name  is  called.  The  Word  of  God.*^ 
(1-1)  And  the  soldiery  of  heaven  followed  him,  on  1-1 
white  horses,  clad  in  garments  of  fine  linen,  pure 
[and]  white.     (15)  And  from  his  mouth  issued  a  15 
sharp  two-edged  sword,  that  with  it  he  could  smite 
the  nations ;  and  he  will  rule  the  nations  with  a 
rod  of  iron ;  and  he  will  tread  the  wine-press  of  the 
wrath  of  God  Almighty.     (16)  And  he  hath  upon  16 
his  vesture  and  upon  his  thigh  the  words  written: 
King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords. — (17)  And  I  saw  17 
an  angel  standing  in  the  sun  ;  and  he  cried  with  a 
loud  voice,  saying  to  all  the  fowls  that  fly  in  the 
midst  of  heaven :    Come  ye,  assemble   unto  this 
great  supper  of  God ;    (18)  that  ye  may  cat  the  18 


APOCALYPSE,  XX. 


467 


flesh  of  kings,  and  the  flesh  of  captains  of  thou- 
sands, and  the  flesh  of  valiant  men,  and  the  flesh 
of  horses  and  of  those  who  sit  on  them,  and  the 
flesh  of  all  the  free-born  and  of  slaves,  and  of  the 

19  small  and  the  great. — (19)  And  I  saw  the  beast  of 
prey,  and  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  their  warriors, 
that  they  assembled  to  wage  battle  with  him  who 
sat  on  the   [white]   horse,  and  with  his  warriors. 

20  (20)  And  the  beast  of  prey  was  captured,  and  the 
false  prophet  that  was  with  him,  who  did  those 
prodigies  before  him,  whereby  he  seduced  them 
who  had  received  the  mark  of  the  beast  of  prey 
and  who  worshipped  his  image.  And  they  were 
both  cast  alive  into  the  lakc^  of  fire,  Avhich  burneth 

21  with  sulphur.  (21)  And  the  rest  were  slain  by 
the  sword  of  him  that  sat  on  the  horse,  by  that 
[sword]   which  issueth  from  his  mouth:  and  all 

XX.  the  fowls  were  satiated  with  their  flesh. — (XX.)  And 
I  saw  an  angel  that  descended  from  heaven,^  having 
the  key  of  the  abyss,  and  a  great  chain  in  his  hand. 

2  (2)  And  he  seized  the  dragon,  the  old  serpent,  who 
is  the  Deceiver=i  and  Satan,  who  seduced  the  whole 
habitable  world  :  and  he  bound  him  a  thousand 

3  years.  (3)  And  he  cast  him  into  the  ab3^ss,  and 
closed  and  sealed  upon  him ;  so  that  he  might  de- 
ceive the  nations  no  more,  until  these  thousand 
years  shall  be  completed  :  but  after  that,  he  will  be 

4  loosed  for  a  little  time.  (1)  And  I  saw  thrones, 
and  [persons]  sat  on  them,  and  judgment  was  given 
to  them,  and  to  the  souls  that  were  beheaded  for 
the  testimony  of  Jesus  and  for  the  word  of  God : 
and  these  are  they  who  had  not  worshipped  the 
beast  of  prey,  nor  its  image,  neither  had  they  re- 
ceived the  mark  upon  their  forehead  or  on  their 
hand;  and  they  lived  and  reigned  with  their  Mes- 

5  siah  those  thousand  years.     (5)    This  is  the  first 

6  resurrection.!^  (6)  Blessed  and  holy  is  he  that  hath 
part  in  this  first  resurrection  :  over  them  the  second 
death  hath  no  dominion  ;  but  they  shall  be, — [nay] 
are,  priests  of  God  and  of  his  Messiah ;  and  they 

7  will  reign  with  him  the  thousand  years. — (7)  And 
when  these  thousand  years  shall  be   completed, 

8  Satan  will  be  released  from  his  prison ;  (8)  and 
will  go  forth  to  seduce  the  nations  that  are  in  the 
four  corners  of  the  earth,  Gog  and  Magog ;  and  to 
assemble  them  for  battle,  whose  number  is  as  the 


Sy. 


»  Sy. 


Sy.  IALCjuD 


468 


APOCALYPSE,    XXI. 


Sy. 


I^.^l 


^  Sy.  ^Ox^ 


Sy.  Olaph 
and  Tau. 


sand  of  the  sea.  (9)  And  they  went  up  on  the  9 
breadth  of  the  earth,  and  encompassed  the  camp  of 
the  saints,  and  the  beloved  city.  And  fire  came 
down  from  God  out  of  heaven,  and  consumed  them. 
(10)  And  the  Accuser^  who  seduced  them,  Avas  cast  10 
into  the  lake  of  fire  and  sulphur,  where  also  were 
the  beast  of  prey  and  the  false  prophet :  and  they 
shall  be  tormented,  day  and  night,  for  ever  and  ever. 

And  I  saw  a  great  white  throne,  and  Hirn  who  11 
sitteth  thereon  ;  from  whose  presence  the  earth  and 
heaven  fled  away,  and   this   their    place  was  not 
found.     (12)  And  I  saw  the  dead,  great  and  small,  12 
standing  before  the  throne;  and  the  books  were 
opened ;  and  another  book  was  opened,  which  is 
[the  book]   of  life.     And  the  dead  were  judged 
from  the  things  written  in  the  books,  according  to 
their  deeds.     (13)  And  the  sea  gave  up  the  dead  13 
it ;  and  death  and  the  grave*^  gave  up  the  dead 


in 

in  them.     And  they  were  judged,  each  one  accord- 
to  his  deeds.     (14)  And  death  and  the  grave 


mo- 


14 
were  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire.     This  is  the  second 
death,  [namely,]  this  lake  of  fire.    (15)  And  if  any  15 
one  was  not  found  enrolled  in  the  book  of  life,  he 

was  cast  into  this  lake  of  fire. 

And  I  saw  new  heavens,  and  a  new  earth :  for  XXI. 
the  former  heaven  and  the  former  earth  had  passed 
away  :  and  the  sea  was  no  more.     (2)  And  I  saw     2 
the  holy  city,  the  New  Jerusalem,  descending  from 
God  out  of  heaven,  prepared  like  a  bride  adorned 
for  her  husband.     (3)  And  I  heard  a  great  voice     8 
from  heaven,  which  said:  Behold,  the  tabernacle 
of  God  is  with  men  ;  and  he  dwell eth  with  them : 
they  will  be  his  people ;  and  God  Avill  be  with 
them,  a  God  to  them.     (4)  And  every  tear  will  be     4 
wiped  from  their  eyes ;  and  there  will  no  more  be 
death,  nor  mourning,  nor  wailing ;  nor  shall  pain 
be  any  more  ;  because  the  former  things  are  passed 
away.     (5)  And  He  who  sat  on  the  throne,  said :     5 
Behold,  I  make  all  things   new.     And  he  said: 
Write;    because  these  are  the  faithful  and   true 
words  of  God.     (6)  And  he  said   to  me:    I  am     6 
Alpha  and  Omega, ^^  the  Beginning  and  the  Com- 
pletion :  to  him  who  thirsteth,  will  I  give  of  the 
fountain  of  living  water,  gratis.     (7)  lie  that  over-     7 
Cometh,  shall  inherit  these  things ;  and  I  will  be  his 


APOCALYPSE,  XXI. 


469 


8  God,  and  he  shall  be  my  son.  (8)  But  to  the  timid, 
and  the  unbelieving,  and  to  the  sinful,  and  polluted, 
and  to  manslayers,  and  whoremongers,  and  sorcer- 
ers, and  idolaters,  and  to  all  false  persons,  their 
portion  shall  be  in  the  lake  that  burnetii  with  fire 

9  and  sulphur,  which  is  the  second  death. — (9)  And 
there  came  one  of  those  seven  angels,  who  have  the 
seven  cups  filled  with  the  seven  last  plagues,  and 
talked  with  me,  saying :  Come,  I  will  show  thee 

10  the  bride,  the  wife  of  the  Lamb.  (10)  And  he  bore 
me  away  in  the  spirit,  to  a  mountain  great  and 
high,  and  he  showed  me  the  holy  city,  Jerusalem, 

11  descending  out  of  heaven  from  God  ;  (11)  in  which 
was  the  glory  of  God,  as  a  brilliant  light,  and  re- 
sembling a  very  precious  gem ;  like  a  jasper  stone, 

12  resembling  crystal.  (12)  And  it  had  a  wall  great 
and  lofty,  which  had  twelve  gates,  and  names  in- 
scribed on  them,  which  are  the  names  of  the  twelve 

13  tribes  of  the  children  of  Israel.  (13)  On  the  east, 
three  gates;  on  the  north,  three  gates;  [on  the 
south,  three  gates;  and  on  the  west,  three  gates]. 

14  (14)  And  the  wall  of  the  city  had  twelve  founda- 
tions,  and  upon  them  the  twelve   names  of  the 

15  twelve  legates  of  the  Lamb.  (15)  And  he  that 
talked  with  me,  had  a  measure,  a  golden  reed ;  so 
that  he  could  measure  the  city,  and  its  gates,  and 

16  its  wall.  (16)  x\nd  the  city  stood  up  four  square; 
and  its  length  was  the  same  as  its  breadth.  And 
he  measured  the  city  with  the  reed,  to  twelve  fur- 
longs of  twelve  thousand  ;•'  and  the  length  and  the 
breadth   and    the  height  of  it  were    [ail]    equal. 

17  (17)  And  he  measured  its  wall,  a  hundred  and  forty 
and  four  measures  of  the  cubits  of  a  man,  that  is, 

18  of  the  angel,  (18)  And  the  structure  of  its  wall 
[was  of]  jasper;  and  the  city  was  of  pure  gold, 

19  like  pure  glass.  (19)  And  the  foundations  of  the 
wall  of  the  city  were  adorned  with  every  precious 
stone.  The  first  foundation,  a  jasper  ;  the  second, 
a  sapphire ;  the  third,  a  chalcedony ;  the  fourth,  an 

20  emerald;  (20)  the  fifth,  a  sardonyx;  the  sixth,  a 
sardius;  the  seventh,  a  chrysolite;  the  eighth,  a 
beryl ;  the  ninth,  a  topaz ;  the  tenth,  a  chryso- 
prasus ;  the    eleventh,  a  jacinth ;    the  twelfth,   an 

21  amethj^st.  (21)  And  the  twelve  gates  [were]  twelve 
pearls;  each  [pearl]  one  gate,  and  each  [gate]  one 
pearl :  and  the  broad  street  of  the  city  was  pure 


^  Gr.  to  12,000 
furlongs. 


470 


APOCALYPSE,    XXII. 


Sy. 


Sy.  15AJ 


gold,  like  brilliant  glass.     (22)  And  I  saw  no  tern-  22 
pie  in  it ;  for  the  Lord  Almighty  is  its  temple,  and 
the  Lamb.     (23)  And  the  city  hath  no  need  of  the  23 
sun  or  of  the  moon,  to  enlighten  it ;  for  the  glory 
of  God  enlighteneth  it,  and  the  Lamb  is  the  lamps 
of  it.     (2-i)  And    the    nations    that  were   saved,<^  24 
shall  walk  by  means  of  its  light,  and  the  kings  of 
the  earth  will  bring  their  glory  and  the  wealth  of 
the  nations  into  it.     (25)  And  its  gates  shall  not  be  25 
shut  by  day  ;  for  there  is  no  night  there.    (26)  And  26 
they  will  bring  the  glory  and  honor  of  the  nations 
into  it.     (27)  And  there  shall   not  enter  it,  any  27 
thing   polluted,   or   that   practiseth   impurity  and 
falsehood ;    but   they   who    are  registered   in   the 
Lamb's  book  of  life.    (XXII.)  And  he  showed  XXIL 
me  a  river  of  living  water,  transparent  [as]  crystal, 
whieh  proceeded  from  the  throne  of  Grod  and  the 
Lamb.     (2)  And  in  the  middle  of  its  broad  avenue,     2 
and  near  the  river,  on  this  side  and  on  that,  [was] 
the  tree  of  life ;  which  bore  twelve  [sorts  of]  fruits, 
yielding  one  of  its   fruits  each  month :    and  the 
leaves  of  the  tree  [were]  for  the  healing  of  the  na- 
tions.    (3)  And  there  will  be  no  blight^^  any  more  :     3 
and  the  throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb  will  be  in  it ; 
and  his  servants  will  minister  to  him.      (4)  And     4 
they  will  see  his  face,  and  his  name  [will  be]  on 
their  foreheads.     (5)  And  there  will  be  no  more     5 
night ;  and  they  have  no  need  of  the  light  of  a 
caudle,  or  of  the  light  of  the  sun  ;  because  the  Lord 
God  giveth  them  light :  and  they  will  reign  for 
ever  and  ever. 

And  he  said  to  me:  These  words  [are]  faithful     6 
and  true.     And  the  Lord  God  of  the  spirit  of  the 
prophets,  hath  sent  me,  his  angel,  to  show  unto  his 
servants  the  things  that  must  soon  occur.     (7)  And,     7 
lo,  I  come  quickly :  Blessed  is  he  that  keepeth  the 
words  of  the  prophecy  of  this  book. — (8)  And  more-     8 
over  I  am  John,  the  hearer  and  the  seer  of  these 
things.     And  when  I  heard  and  saw,  I  foil  down  to 
worship  at  the  feet  of  the  angel  who  showed  me 
these  things.     (9)  And  he  said  to  me :  See,  [thou     9 
do  it]  not:  I  am  thy  fellow-servant,  and  of  thy 
brethren  the  prophets,  and  of  them  that  observe  the 
words  of  this  book.     Worship  God.     (10)  And  he  10 
said  to  me  :  Seal  not  the  words  of  the  ])rophecy  of 
this  book;  for  the  time  is  near.     (11)  lie  that  doth  11 


APOCALYPSE,    XXII. 


471 


evil,  let  him  do  evil  still ;  and  he  that  is  filthy,  let 
him  be  filthy  still;  and  he  that  is  righteous,  let  him 
practise  righteousness  still ;  and  he  that  is  sanctified, 

12  let  him  be  sanctified  still. — (12)  Behold,  I  come 
quickly ;  and  my  reward  is  with  me,  to  recompense 

13  every  one  according  to  his  work.  (13)  I  am  Alpha 
and  Omega,''  the  First  and  the  Last,  the  Com- 

14  mencement  and  the  Completion. — (14)  Blessed  are 
they  who  do  his  commandments,  that  they  may 
have  a  right'^  to  the  tree  of  life,  and  may  enter 

15  through  the  gates  into  the  city.  (15)  Without 
[will  be]  dogs,  and  sorcerers,  and  whoremongers, 
and  manslayers,  and  idolaters,  and  every  one  that 

16  loveth  and  doeth  falsehood. — (16)  I  Jesus  have 
sent  my  angel,  to  testify  to  you  these  things  before 
the  churches.  I  am  the  root  and  offspring  of  Da- 
vid :  like   the   splendid    star   of  the    morning. — 

17  (17)  And  the  Spirit  and  the  bride  say.  Come  thou. 
And  let  him  that  heareth,  say.  Come  thou.  And 
let  him  who  thirsteth,  come  ;  and  he  that  is  inclined, 
let  him  take  the  living  water  gratis. 

18  I  testify  to  every  one  that  heareth  the  words 
of  the  prophecy  of  this  book,  that  if  any  one  shall 
add  to  them,  God  will  add  to  him  the  plagues  that 

19  are  written  in  this  book.  (19)  And  if  any  one 
shall  take  away  from  the  words  of  the  book  of  this 
prophecy,  God  will  take  away  his  portion  from  the 
tree  of  life,  and  from  the  holy  cit}^,  which  are  de- 

20  scribed  in  this  book. — (20)  lie  who  testifieth  these 
things,  saith  :  Yes,  I  come  quickl3\ — Amen.  Come, 
Lord  Jesus ! 

21  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  [be] 
with  all  the  saints.     Amen. 

End  of  the  Revelation  of  John  the  Evangelist ;  and  of  the 
wliole  ]\eio  Testament,  as  translated  into  the  language  of  the 
Syrians.^ 


^  Sy.  Olaph 
and  Tau. 

^Sy. 


Sy.lxjjQID 


#lnrt|  k  in  rt. 


APPENDIX  I. 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  THE  SYRIAC  NEW  TESTAMENT  INTO  LESSONS 

AS   READ   IN   THE   PUBLIC   WOIiSHIP. 


The  manuscripts  of  the  Syriac  New  Testament  are  strangers  to  the 
modern  division  of  the  Books  into  Chapters  and  Verses :  instead  of  which, 
they  divide  the  several  Books  (except  the  Apocalypse)  into  reading  Les- 
sons, [Xj;XD,  which  are  of  different  lengths,  but  will  average  about  fifteen 
of  our  verses. 

The  printed  Syriac  New  Testaments  exhibit  our  division  into  Chapters 
and  Verses,  marked  commonly  in  the  side  margin.  The  text  of  the 
London  editions  of  1816  and  1826  (which  were  intended  for  circulation  in 
the  East)  is  divided  (except  the  Apocalypse)  into  paragraphs  correspond- 
ing with  the  reading  Lessons  in  the  common  manuscripts.  These  Lessons 
are  separately  numbered  in  each  Book,  and  the  occasions  are  stated  on 
which  they  are  to  be  read. — This  distribution  into  reading  Lessons,  its 
correspondence  with  the  division  into  Chapters  and  Verses,  and  the 
occasions  to  which  the  Lessons  are  appropriated,  are  contained  in  the 
following  Table : — 

Lessons  for  Public  Worship. 

The  occasions  which  are  starred  [  *  ]  are  omitted  in  the  edition  of  1826. 


Lessons. 

Matthew. 
Chap,  and  Ver. 

I. 

i.    1-17. 

II. 

18-25. 

III. 

ii.    1-12. 

IV. 

13-18. 

V. 

19-23. 

VI. 

iii.    1-17. 

VII. 

iv.    1-11. 

VIII. 

12-25. 

OCCASIONS. 


Sunday  before  Christmas  (j^ \  >). 

The  Revelation  to  Joseph. 

Vespers  of  Christmas  ("j^liij?  ]  m  ^n^). 

Matins  (|r^»   )  of  Slaughter  of  the  Infants. 

Oblation  ("[rDJQjD)  at  Slaughter  of  the  Infants. 

Feast  of  Epiphany  (]>.kJJ5  1?U»). 

(Sunday,  commencement  of  Lent  (]1dO»):  and,  Obla- 
\     tion  of  the  Forty.  ^ 

Sunday  after  Epiphany  (poJj). 


474 


APPENDIX    I. 


Lessons  for  Public  Worship — Continued. 


Lessous. 


Matthew. 
Cliap.  and  Ver. 


IX. 
X. 

XI. 

XII. 
XIII. 
XIV. 

XV. 

XVI. 

XVII. 

XVIII. 

XIX. 

XX. 

XXI. 

XXII. 

XXIII. 

XXIV. 

XXV. 

XXVI. 

XXVII. 

XXVIII. 

XXIX. 

XXX. 

XXXI. 

XXXIl. 

XXXIII. 

XXXIV. 

XXXV. 

XXXVI. 

XXXVII. 

XXXVIII. 

XXXIX. 
XL. 

XLI. 

XLII. 

XLIII. 

XLIV, 

XI.V, 

XLVI 

XLVII. 

XLVIII 

XLIX 

L 

LI 

LI  I 


OCCASIONS. 


(  viii. 
i     i.x. 


(     i.x.  36-    ) 
\      X.  15.     \ 


XI. 

\    xii. 
xiL 


j  xiii. 

\  xiv. 

xiv. 


XVI 

xvi 


XVI 

xvii 
xvii 


1-20. 
20-48. 

1-15. 
16-24. 
25-34. 

1-12. 
13-29. 

1-13. 
14-22. 
23-    ) 

8.      \ 

9-17. 
18-26. 
27-35. 
36- 
15. 

16-33 
34-42. 

1-1.5. 
1 6-24. 
25-    ] 

8.      f 

9-21. 
22-37. 
38-50. 

1-23. 
24-52. 
53-  I 
14.  S 
15-23. 
24-36. 

1-20. 
21-31 
32- 
12. 

13-20 
21-27 
28- 
13 
14-21. 
22-27. 

1-14 

1.5-22 

23-35. 

1-15. 

16-26. 

27-30. 

1-16. 

17-28. 

29-34. 


(    XV.  32-    ) 
j  xvi.  12.     \ 


(  xvi.  28-    ) 
\  xvii.  13.     j 


Tlie  Apostles-and  Patrinrchs. 
]\Iatins,  Tuesday,  1st  Weok  in  Lent. 
]\I;ifins,  Wednesday,  1st  Week  in  Lent. 
]\Ionday  of  2d  Week  in  Lent. 
Tuesday,  1st  Week  in  Lent. 
Tuesday  of  2d  Week  in  Lent. 
Matins  on  Friday,  1st  Week  in  Lent. 
Lesson  for  Vespers,  2d  Sunday  in  Lent. 
Lesson,  Oblation,  1st  Saturday  in  Lent. 

Vespers,  3d  Sunday  in  Lent. 

Thursday  of  Week  in  Albis  (Whitsun-week). 
*Commemoration  of  the  Dead. 
Friday  of  otli  Week  in  Lent. 

Commemoration  of  the  holy  Apostles. 

^Commemoration  of  the  holy  Martyrs. 
*Lesson  for  tlie  Dead. 

Oblation,  Decapitation  of  John. 

Monday  of  3d  Week  in  Lent. 

Vespers,  2d  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

Saturday  of  3d  Week  in  Lent. 

Vespers,  the  Sunday  comraeneinjr  Lent. 
*Vespers,  Commemoration  of  the  Mother  of  God. 

Wednesday,  2d  Week  in  Lent. 
*Obiation,  Sunday  of  Priests, 

Vespers,  Decapitation  of  John. 

Oblation  on  any  day. 

Vespei-s,  2d  Sunday  after  the  Resurrection. 

Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

Vespers,  4th  Sunday  in  Lent. 

Oblation  on  any  day. 

Commemoration  of  the  holy  Apostles. 
2d  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

*Ve.spers,  Feast  of  the  Slaughtered. 

Monday,  3d  Week  in  Lent. 

Tuesday,  3d  Week  in  Lent. 

3d  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

4tli  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

Friday,  2d  Week  in  Lent. 
*Matins,  Sunday  after  Feast  of  the  Cross. 
*C<)nimemoration  of  F.  Anthony  and  his  Brethren, 

IMatins,  Feast  of  Peter  the  Apostle. 

Lesson  for  Paul  the  Apostle. 

5th  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

Oblation,  5th  Sunday  in  Lent. 


APPENDIX    I, 


475 


Lessons  for  Public  Worship — Continued. 


MATTHEW. 


Lessons. 

Chap. 

and  Ver. 

LIIL 

xxi. 

1-16. 

LIV. 

17-27. 

LV. 

28-46. 

LVI. 

XXll 

1-14. 

LVII. 

15-22. 

LVIII. 

23-33. 

LIX. 

j  xxii. 
(xxiii 

34-     ) 
12.     \ 

LX. 

xxm. 

13-28. 

LXI. 

29-39. 

LXII. 

xxiv 

1-35. 

LXIII. 

36-44. 

LXIV. 

45-51. 

LXV. 

XXV 

1-13. 

LXVI. 

14-30. 

LXVII. 

31-46. 

LXVIII. 

xxvi. 

1-16. 

LXIX. 

17-30. 

LXX. 

31-75. 

LXXI. 

xxvii 

1-25. 

LXXII. 

26-37. 

LXXIII. 

38-44. 

LXXIV. 

45-56. 

LXXV. 

57-61. 

LXXVI. 

62-66. 

LXXVII. 

xxviu 

1-20. 

OCCASIONS. 


Vespers,  Sunday  of  Hosannns  (Palm  Sunday.) 
Lesson  for  Thursday,  4th  Week  in  Lent. 
2d  Station,  2d  Night  in  Passion  VVeel^•. 
1st  Service,  2d  Nii^ht  in  Passion  Week. 
Vespers,  Tuesday  in  Passion  Week. 
*Lesson  for  the  Dead. 

Matins,  Tuesday  in  Passion  Week. 

1st  Station,  3d  Night  in  Passion  Week, 

2d  Service,  3d  Night  in  Passion  Week ;  and,  of  Stephen. 
*Vespers  on  Feast  of  the  Cross. 
*Lesson  for  tlie  Dead. 
*Oblation,  Sunday  of  Priests. 

3d  Station,  2d  Night  in  Passion  Week: 
*Also,  Commemoration  of  the  holy  Women. 
*Sunday  of  the  Priests. 

Commemoration  of  the  Just  and  Righteous: 

Also,  Friday  in  Albis,  (Whitsun  Week.) 

Thursday  of  the  Mysteries,  (1l]5,)  Holy  Thursday. 
*Also,  Consecration  of  the  Chrism,  same  day. 

Thursday  in  Week  of  IMysteries,  (Passion  Week.) 

Night  of  Preparation  for  the  Crucifixion. 

Matins,  Preparation  for  the  Crucifixion. 

Lesson  for  the  3d  Hour,  (on  Day  of  Crucifixion.) 

Lesson  for  the  6th  Hour,  (Noon,  Day  of  Crucifixion.) 

Lesson  for  the  9th  Hour,  (Day  of  the  Crucifixion.) 

Vespers,  Saturday  of  Annunciation. 

Matins,  Sfiturday  of  Annunciation. 

Vespers,  Sunday  of  the  Resurrection. 


I. 

n. 

HI. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 

VII. 

VIII. 

IX. 

X. 

XI. 

XII. 

XIII. 

XIV. 

•XV. 

XVI. 

XVII. 


I     m.  12.     \ 


\     iv. 


-30. 

•    } 

34. 

41. 
■20. 
43. 
6. 
13. 
29. 
46. 
56. 


Lesson,  Feast  of  Epiphany. 

Vespers,  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

Matins,  2d  Sunday  in  Lent. 

Oblation,  3d  Sunday  in  Lent. 

Matins,  3d  Sunday  after  the  Resurrection. 

Fourth  Saturday  in  Lent. 

6th  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

*Matins,  Commemoration  of  Mary,  Mother  of  God. 

Saturday  in  Albis,  (Whitsun  Week.) 
Thursday,  5th  Week  in  Lent. 
Matins,  Thursday,  5th  Week  in  Lent. 
*Lesson,  the  Martyrs,  and  the  Dead. 
Oblation,  6ih  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 
7th  Sunday  after  Epij)hany. 
Matins,  Decapitation  of  John  Baptist. 
Oblation,  any  Day. 
Lesson,  for  any  Day,  in  general. 


476 

APPENDIX    I. 

Lessons  for  Public  Worship — Contimied. 

MARK. 

OCCASIONS. 

Lessons. 

Chap,  and  Ver. 

XVIII. 

vii.    1-23. 

Lesson  for  Mid  Lent. 

XIX. 

24-37. 

I\I;iliiis,  4th  Sunday  in  Lent. 

XX. 

viii.     1-10. 

Oblation,  any  Day. 

XXI. 

11-33. 

Thursday  of  Week  in  Albis,  (Whitsun  Week.) 

XXII. 

34-38. 

*Lf'sson  for  the  Martyrs. 

XXIII. 

i.x.     1-13. 

*Ol)lalion,  on  Feast  of  Tabernacles. 

XXIV. 

14-32. 

Sunday,  4th  Week  in  Lent. 

XXV. 

33-50. 

Fifth  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

XXVI. 

X.     1-16. 

Blessing  a  Bridegroom  and  Bride. 

XXVII. 

17-27. 

Vespers,  4th  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

XXVIII. 

28-34. 

Peter  the  Apostle. 

XXIX. 

35-52. 

Oblation,  6th  Sunday  in  Lent. 

XXX. 

xi.     1-18. 

Matin.s,  Hosanna  Sunday,  (Palm  Sunday.) 

XXXI. 

\    xii.  17.     \ 

Saturday,  2d  Week  in  Lent. 

XXXII. 

18-27. 

*Oblation  for  the  Dead. 

XXXIII. 

28-40. 

Matins,  4th  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

XXXIV. 

;    xii.  41-    ) 
':  xiii.  37.     \ 

*Matins,  on  Feast  of  the  Cross. 

XXXV. 

xiv.     1-26. 

^Consecration  of  the  Chrism,  (on  Holy  Thursday.) 

XXXVI. 

27-72. 

Night  of  the  Crucifixion. 

XXXVII. 

XV.     1-20. 

M.utins,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 

XXXVIII. 

21-28. 

Third  Hour  (=  9.  a.  m.)  Day  of  Crucifixion. 

XXXIX. 

29-32. 

J\Iid-day,  (noon,)  on  Day  of  Crucifixion. 

XL. 

33-41. 

Ninth  Hour,  (=  3.  p.  w.)  Day  of  Crucifixion. 

XLI. 

(    XV.  42-    ) 

\  xvi.     1.     \ 

2-13. 

Vespers,  Saturday  in  Passion  Week. 

XLII. 

Oblation,  Sunday  of  Resurrection,  (Easter  Sunday 

) 

XLIII. 
n 

14-20. 
JKE. 

Oblation,  on  Ascension  Day, 

I. 

i.  1-25. 

Matins,  Annunciation  to  Zacharias. 

II. 

26-38. 

AniuuK-i.ition  to  the  .Mother  of  God. 

III. 

39-56. 

Visit  of  ]\Iary  to  Elizabeth. 

IV. 

57-80. 

Matins,  Nativity  of  John. 

V. 

ii.     1-20. 

Matins,  P'east  of  the  Nativity,  (Christmas.) 

VI. 

21-35. 

Matins,  Entrance  of  our  Lord  into  the  Temple. 

VII. 

36-41. 

Oblation,  our  Lord's  Entrance  into  the  Temple. 

VIII. 

42-52. 

Sunday  after  the  Nativity. 

IX. 

iii.     1-22. 

Oblation,  Feast  of  Epiphany, 

X. 

23-38. 

Vespers,  2d  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

XI. 

iv.     1-13 

Sunday,  commencement  of  Lent. 

XII. 

14-30. 

Circumcision  of  our  Lord. 

XIII. 

31-44. 

Vespers,  4th  Friday  in  Lent. 

XIV. 

V.     1-11. 

IMatins,  2d  Sunday  after  the  Resurrection. 

XV. 

12-39. 

Matins,  Sunday,  5th  Week  in  Lent. 

XVI. 

vi.     1-11. 

M.ilins,  Tuesday,  5th  Week  in  Lent. 

XVII. 

12-19. 

The  Apostles  ;  '*and  the  Martyrs. 

XVIII. 

20-36. 

Friday,  4th  Week  in  Lent. 

XIX. 

37-49. 

\'es|)ers,  Wednesday,  Week  before  T,ent. 
*And  Commemoration  of  the  Patriarchs. 

APPENDIX    I. 


477 


Lessons  for  Public  Worship — Continued. 


Lessons. 

Chap. 

and  Ver. 

XX. 

vii. 

1-10. 

XXI. 

11-18. 

XXII. 

19-35. 

XXIII. 

36-50. 

XXIV. 

VUl. 

1-15. 

XXV. 

16-21. 

XXVI. 

22-39. 

XXVII. 

40-56. 

XXVIII. 

IX. 

1-11. 

XXIX. 

12-17. 

XXX. 

18-26. 

XXXI. 

27-36. 

XXXII. 

37-50. 

XXXIII. 

51-62. 

XXXIV. 

.\ 

1-24. 

XXXV. 

25-37. 

XXXVI. 

38-41. 

XXXVII. 

XI. 

1-13. 

XXXVIII. 

14-26. 

XXXIX. 

27-36. 

XL. 

37-48. 

XLI. 

49-54. 

XLII. 

xii 

1-12. 

XLIII. 

13-31. 

XLIV. 

32-48, 

XLV. 

49-59. 

XLVI. 

Xlll. 

1-  9. 

XLVII. 

10-22. 

XLVIII. 

23-35. 

XLIX. 

XIV. 

1-24. 

L. 

"      XV. 

25-  ) 
10.     \ 

LI. 

11-32. 

LII. 

XVI. 

1-18. 

LIII. 

19-31. 

LIV. 

xvu 

1-10. 

LV. 

11-19. 

LVI. 

20-37. 

LVII. 

XVIU 

1-17. 

LVIII. 

18-30. 

LIX. 

\  xix 

31-    I 

27.     S 

LX. 

28-40. 

LXI. 

41-48. 

LXII. 

XX 

1-26. 

LXIII. 

27-40. 

LXIV. 

l.i 

":l 

LXV. 

5-28. 

OCCASIONS 


Oblation,  Sunday,  4th  Week  in  I^ent. 

Oblation,  Sunday,  5tli  Week  in  Lent. 

Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

Third  Hour,  Thursday  of  the  Mysteries, 

Thursday,  2d  Week  in  Lent. 
^Commemoration  of  Mary  the  Mother  of  God. 

Vespers,  5th  Sunday  in  Lent. 

Matins,  5th  Sunday  in  Lent. 

Vespers,  5th  Sunday  after  the  Resurrection. 

And  Commemoration  of  the  Apo.stles. 

Oblation  on  any  Da3^ 

Feast  of  the  Apostles. 
*Matins,  Feast  of  Tabernacles. 

Monday,  2d  Week  in  Lent. 

Vespers,  6th  Sunday  after  the  Resurrection. 

Wednesday,  Week  in  Albis,  (Whitsun  Week.) 

Vespers,  6th  Sunday  in  Lent, 
^Commemoration  of  the  Holy  Women. 

Vespers,  Tuesday,  1st  Week  in  Lent. 

Tuesday,  6th  Week  in  Lent. 
*Feast  of  Mary  the  IMother  of  God. 

Wednesday,  6th  Week  in  Lent. 

Oblation,  Annunciation  to  Zacharias. 
^Commemoration  of  the  Martyrs. 

Friday,  3d  Week  in  Lent. 
*Lesson  for  (the  Ordination  of)  Bishops. 

Lesson  for  (Days  of)  Supplication,  (Rogation  Days.) 
*Lesson,  2d  Sunday  after  Feast  of  the  Cross. 

Vespers,  5th  Saturday  in  Lent. 
^Commemoration  of  the  Just,  and  the  Patriarchs. 

Tuesday,  4th  Week  in  Lent, 

*Commemoration  of  the  Monks. 

Vespers,  Thursday  before  Lent. 

Matins,  Sunday  commencing  Lent. 
*Vespers,  Sunday  of  the  Dead. 

Vespers,  Friday,  1st  Week  in  Lent. 

Oblation,  Sunday  of  2d  Week  in  Lent. 

Thursday,  3d  Week  in  Lent. 

Vespers,  1st  Saturday  in  Lent. 
^Commemoration  of  F.  Anthony  and  his  fellow  Saints. 

Thursday,  6th  Week  in  Lent. 

Sunday  of  Hosannas,  (Palm  Sunday.) 
Vespers,  Monday  of  Passion  Week. 
3d  Station,  3d  Mght  in  Passion  Week. 
*Lesson  for  the  Dead. 

Oblation,  5th  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

Oblation,  on  Feast  of  the  Crucifi.xion, 


478 


APPENDIX    I. 


Lessons  for  Public  Worship — Continued. 


LUKE. 


Lessons. 

Chap,  and  Ver. 

LXVI. 

xxi.  29-38. 

LXVII. 

x.xii.    1-30. 

LXVIII. 

31-65. 

LXIX. 

xxiii.  25.     S 

LXX. 

26-33., 

LXXI. 

34^43. 

LXXII. 

44-49. 

Lxxm. 

5  50-  ) 
(xxiv.  12. 

LXXIV. 

13-35. 

LXXV. 

36-53. 

JC 

HN. 

I. 

i.     1-17. 

II. 

18-28. 

III. 

29-42. 

IV. 

43-51. 

V. 

ii.    1-11. 

VI. 

12-22. 

VII. 

23-  ) 
■     ill.  12.      \ 

VIII. 

13-21. 

IX. 

)     iv.T    \ 

X. 

4-42. 

XI. 

43-54. 

XII. 

V.     1-18. 

XIII. 

19-29. 

XIV. 

30-47. 

XV. 

vi.    1-15. 

XVI. 

16-29. 

XVII. 

30-46. 

XVIII. 

47-60. 

XIX. 

61-71. 

XX. 

vii.    1-36. 

XXI. 

37-44. 

(          45-52. 

XXII. 

]  -  ^^-  \ 
(vm.  11.     y 

XXIII. 

12-27. 

XXIV. 

28-59. 

XXV. 

ix.    1-41. 

XXVI. 

X.    1-21. 

XXVII. 

22-42. 

XXVIII 

xi.     1-46. 

XXIX. 

47-54. 

OCCASIONS. 


Vespers,  Sunday  after  Feast  of  Crucifixion. 
Vespers,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 
Lesson,  Night  of  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 

Matins,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 

Third  Hour,  on  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 
IMidday,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 
Ninth  Hour,  on  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 

Twiliglit,  Saturday  of  Annunciation. 

Monday  of  Week  in  Albis,  (Whitsun  Week.) 
The  Ascension  of  our  Lord. 


Feast,  Nativity  of  our  Lord,  (Christmas.) 

Matins,  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

Oblation,  Sunday  afier  Epiphany. 

Oblation,  3d  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

Matins,  Sunday  commencing  Lent. 

Oblation,  Saturday  of  Resurrection  of  Lazarus. 

Matins,  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

Matins,  Mid  Lent. 

Oblation  at  Dedication  of  a  Church. 

Night  of  consecrating  Water,  (at  Epiphany.) 
*And,  the  Genuflection  at  Pentecost. 

Vespers,  Tuesday,  5tli  Week  in  Lent. 

Matins,  3d  Sunday  in  Lent. 
*Lesson  for  the  Dead. 

Matins,  3d  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

Oblation,  4tli  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

Wednesday,  6th  Week  in  Lent. 

Oblation,  any  Day. 

Oblation,  any  Day. 

Matins,  Wednesday  of  Passion  Week. 

Matins,  Wednesday,  6tii  Week  in  Lent. 
■^Commemoration  of  Doctors  of  the  Church. 

Matins,  Saturday,  5tli  Week  in  Lent. 

Lesson  of  the  sinning  Woman  :  [not  in  MSS.] 

Oblation,  2d  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

Wednesday  of  Week  in  Albis,  (Whitsun  Week.) 

Matins,  6th  Sunday  in  Lent. 

Vespers,  Consecration  of  a  Church  : 
*And,  Creation  of  Bishops. 
!   Lesson,  at  Consecration  of  a  Churcii. 
I  Oltlation  of  the  Forty:   [Quadragesima?]  — 
I  Matins,  Wednesday  of  Passion  W'eck. 


APPENDIX    I. 


479 


Lessons  for  Public  Worship — Continued. 


JOHN. 


Lessous.       Chap,  and  Ver. 


XXX. 

XXXI. 

XXXII. 
XXXIII. 
XXXIV. 

XXXV. 

XXXVI. 

XXXVII. 

XXXVIII. 
XXXIX. 

XL, 

XLI. 
XLII. 

XLIII. 

XLIV. 

XLV. 

XLVI. 

XLVII. 

XLVIII. 

XLIX. 

L. 

LI. 

LII. 


LIII. 


(     xi.  55-    ) 
\    xii.  11.     f 


(  15-    1 

\    XV.    7.     \ 


xni. 
xiv. 

XV, 

I  xvi. 

\  xvii. 

xviii. 

\  xix. 


OCCASIONS. 


20-25, 


Matins,  Saturday  of  Resurrection  of  Lazarus. 

Hosanna  Sunday,  (Palm  Sunday.) 
Matins,  Wednesday  of  Passion  Week. 
Lesson  of  tlie  mystical  Washing  (of  Feet.) 
Matins,  5tli  Sunday  after  the  Resurrection. 
Commemoration  of  Thomas  and  Philip,  Apostles. 

Vespers,  Pentecostal  Sunday. 

Matins,  Pentecostal  Sunday  in  Albis,  (Whitsunday.) 

Oblation,  Pentecost,  (Whitsunday.) 

Vespers,  3d  Sunday  after  the  Resurrection. 

Matins,  6th  Sunday  after  the  Resurrection  : 
*And,  at  Creation  of  Presbyters. 
*3d  Sunday  after  the  Feast  of  the  Cross. 

Night,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 

Matins,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 

Third  Hour,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 
Sixth  Hour,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 
Ninth  Hour,  Friday  of  the  Crueitixion, 
Vespers,  Saturday  of  the  Annunciation. 
Matins,  Sunday  of  tlie  Resurrection,  (Easter  Day.) 
Vespers,  New  Sunday,  (Whitsunday.) 
Matins,  New  Sunday,  (Whitsunday.) 
Oblation,  New  Sunday,  (Whitsunday.) 
Commemoration  of  Simon  Peter:  and, 
Consecration  of  a  Church  :  and 
^Creation  of  Bishops. 
Commemoration  of  John  the  Evangelist, 


ACTS. 


I. 

i. 

1-14. 

II. 

15-26. 

III. 

11. 

1-21. 

IV. 

22-36. 

V. 

37-47. 

VI. 

111. 

1-10. 

VII. 

11-26. 

VIII. 

IV. 

1-18. 

IX. 

19-31. 

X. 

32-37. 

XI. 

V. 

1-11. 

XII. 

12-28. 

XIII. 

29-42. 

XIV. 

vi. 

1-12. 

XV 

13-    1 

Vll. 

10.     ! 

Ascension  of  our  Lord. 

Oblation,  Thursday  of  the  Mysteries. 

The  Genuflection. 

Twilight,  great  Sunday  of  the  Resurrection,  (Easter.) 

Rlonday,  6th  Week  in  Lent. 

Golden  Friday. 

Monday  in  Albis,  (in  Whitsun  Week.) 
^Commemoration  of  the  Martyrs. 
*Lesson  for  the  iMartyrs. 

Tuesday  in  Albis,  (in  Whitsun  Week.) 
*For  the  Dead. 

For  the  Apostles. 

Wednesday  in  Albis,  (Whitsun  Week.) 

Friday  of  Repose  :  and,  of  Saints  in  General. 

Thursday  in  Albis,  (Whitsun  Week.) 


480 

APPENDIX    L 

Lessons  for  Public  Worship — Continued. 

ACTS. 

OCCASIONS. 

Lessons. 

XVI. 

Chap,  and  Ver. 

Vil.  11-29. 

Slaughter  of  the  Children. 

XVII. 

30-36. 

Matins,  Hosanna  (Palm)  Sunday. 

XVIII. 

37-43. 

Saturday  in  Albis,  (Whitsun  Week.) 

XIX. 

44-53. 

For  Bapiistu  :  *and,  the  Mother  of  God. 

XX. 

(           64-    , 
j  viii.    2.     \ 

Commemoration  of  Stephen. 

XXI. 

3-13. 

Tiiird  Sunday  after  the  Resurrection. 

XXII. 

14-L'5. 

Monday,  Lst  Week  in  Lent. 

XXIII. 

26-40. 

Benediction  of  Waters,  (on  Night  of  Epiphany:) 
And,  at  Baptism. 

XXIV. 

ix.    1-21. 

Sunday  commencing  Lent. 

XXV. 

22-35. 

Second  Sunday  in  Lent. 

XXVI. 

36-43. 

*For  the  Dead. 

XXVII. 

x.    1-  8. 

Tiiird  Sunday  in  Lent. 

XXVIII. 

9-24. 

Tile  Apostles:  and,  Golden  Friday. 

XXIX. 

25-33. 

Tuesday,  1st  Week  in  Lent. 

XXX. 

j           34-    } 
;     xi.    1.     ^ 

Wednesday,  1st  Week  in  Lent. 

XXXI. 

2-18. 

Thursday,  1st  Week  in  Lent. 

XXXII. 

19-30. 

Friday,  1st  Week  in  Lent. 

XXXIII. 

xii.     1-24. 

Saturday,  1st  Week  in  Lent. 

XXXIV. 

j          25-    ) 
xiii.  12.     \ 

Sunday,  4th  Week  in  Lent. 

XXXV. 

13-25. 

Monday  of  Passion  Week. 

XXXVI. 

26-43. 

Great  Sunday  of  the  Resurrection,  (Easter  Day.) 

XXXVII. 

i          44-    ) 
\  xiv.    6.     S 

Tuesday  of  Passion  Week. 

XXXVIII. 

7-19. 

Wednesday  of  Passion  Week. 

XXXIX. 

20-    ) 
XV.    3.     \ 

Monday,  4th  Week  in  Lent. 

XL. 

4-12. 

Vespers,  Thursday  of  the  Mysteries. 

XLI. 

13-22. 

Tuesday,  4th  Week  in  Lent. 

XLII. 

23-33. 

IMid  Lent. 

XLin. 

35-41. 

Thursday,  4th  Week  in  Lent. 

XLIV. 

xvi.     1-  7. 

Friday,  4th  Week  in  Lent. 

XLV. 

8-15. 

Satuuday,  4th  Week  in  Lent. 

XLVI. 

16-35. 

Sunday,  5th  Week  in  Lent. 

XLVII. 

j          36-    ) 
[   xvii.  1.     y 

Sunday,  6th  Week  in  Lent. 

XLVIII. 

2-14. 

Niglit  of  the  Crucifixion. 

XLIX. 

15-21. 

4th  Sunday  after  the  Resurrection. 

L. 

22-34. 

5th  Sunday  after  the  Resurrection. 

LI. 

xviii.    1-11. 

Commemoration  of  the  Saints. 

LI  I. 

12-28. 

6tii  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

LIII. 

xi.\.     1-12. 

Matins,  Pentecostal  Sunday,  (Wliitsunday.) 

LIV. 

13-22. 

First  Sunday  alter  Pentecost. 

LV. 

23-29. 

Second  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

LVI. 

j          30-    ) 
\    XX.    6.     \ 

Third  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

LVIL 

7-16. 

*For  the  Dead. 

APPENDIX    I. 


481 


Lessons  for  Public  Worship^- Continued. 


ACTS. 


Lessons.       Chap,  and  Ver. 


LVIII. 

LIX. 

LX. 

LXI. 

LXII. 

LXIII, 

LXIV. 

LXV, 

LXVl, 

LXVII. 

LXVIII, 

LXIX, 


j    XX.  17-  ) 

(  xxi.  12.  J 

I  xxu.  29.  f 

\     -  ''- 

(xxui.  11.  ) 


XX.  17 

xxi.  12 

13 

xxii.  29 

30 

xxiii.  11 

12 

( xxiv.    1 

(  XXV.  12 

\       .  ^^ 
(xxvi.  23 

(  24- 

ixxvii.  8 

9 

27- 

xxviii.    1 

11 

23 


OCCASIONS. 


-35, 


-  I 


■26. 
-44. 
-10. 
-22 
-31. 


*For  the  Saints  and  Martyrs. 

Fourth  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

Matins,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 
Third  Hour,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 
Mid-Day,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 

Ninth  Hour,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 

Fifth  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

Sixth  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 
Seventh  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 
Eighth  Sunday  after  Penteco.st. 
Ninth  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 
Tenth  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 


ROMANS. 

1. 1        i. 

II. 


III. 

IV. 
V. 

VI. 

VII. 

VIII. 

IX. 

X. 

XL 

XII. 

XIII. 

XIV. 

XV. 

XVI 
XVII, 

XVIII, 

XIX 

XX 

XXI 

XXII. 
XXIII. 


(  viii. 


I     iii.  18.      \ 
(    iv.  12.      5 


-27, 


I  i.;i:  1 


xn. 
xiii. 


6- 

22- 

30- 

4. 

5- 

1- 

13- 

1- 

1- 


Lesson  for  any  Day. 
Friday,  2d  Week  in  Lent. 

Lesson  for  any  Day 

Friday,  3d  Weeli  in  Lent. 
Any  Day. 

Any  Day. 

*For  tlie  :Martyrs. 

Any  Day. 

Monday  in  Albis,  (in  Whitsun  Week.) 

Saturday,  1st  Week  in  Lent. 

Monday,  6th  Week  in  Lent :  and,  at  Baptism. 

Tuesday  of  Passion  Week. 

Twilight,  great  Sunday  of  the  Resurrection. 

Tuesday,  6tli  W^eek  in  Lent. 

*Lesson  for  the  Martyrs. 

Annunciation  to  Zacharias. 

Lesson  fur  Pilgrini.s. 

Entrance  of  our  Lord  into  tlie  Temple  : 

And,  Commemoration  of  Prophets  and  Apostles. 

Middle  of  Pentecost. 

Tuesday  in  Passion  Week. 

Hosanna  (Palm)  Sunday. 

Monday,  1st  Week  in  Lent. 

Time  when  a  Church  makes  an  Election. 


482 


APPENDIX    I. 


Lessons  for  Public  Worship — Continued. 


XXIV. 

XXV. 

XXVI, 

XXVII, 


Chap,  and  Ver. 


OCCASIONS. 


Matins,  Sunday  commencing  Lent. 


xiii.  11- 
iiv.  23. 
XV.     1-13.'  Tuesday,  1st  Week  in  Lent. 

14-38.    Second  Sunday  in  Lent, 
xvi.    1-24.  *For  the  Holy  Women. 


1  CORINTHIANS. 


L! 
II. 

in. 

IV. 


I   r,.'t} 


V. 
VI. 

vn.lj 

VIII. 

IX. 

X. 

XL 

XII. 

XIII. 

XIV. 
XV. 

XVI. 

XVII. 
XVIII. 

XIX. 


\.'t\ 


XX. 

XXI. 
XXII. 
XXIII. 
XXIV, 
XXV 
XXVI 
XXVII 


i.    1- 
18- 
11.    4 
'    10 
iii.    1 
16- 
5 
6 
17- 
6. 
6- 
1- 
12- 
1- 
25- 


17. 


-16, 


It."} 


]    xi.  22.      \ 


[2 

13 

X.    1 

14 

xi.  22 

23 

xii.    1 

28 

xiii.    3 

4 

xiv.  19 

20- 

34 

XV.      1 

20 

34 

xvi.    1 

13 


-34 

-27. 

-    I 


1  xiv.  19.      \ 


2  CORINTHIANS. 


I. 
II. 

Ill, 


IV. 

V. 


1. 


1-  7. 
8-22. 
23-    ) 
ii.  11.     ( 

12- 
ui.    3. 
4-18 


)     iii.    3.      \ 


Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 

Matins,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion, 

First  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 
Second  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

Third  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

Fourth  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

Fifth  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

Sunday  after  the  Resurrection. 
Sixth  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 
Thursday,  1st  Week  in  Lent. 
Wednesday,  1st  Week  in  Lent. 
For  the  holy  Martyrs. 

For  any  Day. 

*Commeraoration  of  Anthony  and  his  Companions. 
Oblation,  on  Epiphany  Day. 

Matins,  Thursday  of  the  Mysteries. 

Oblation,  Thnrsday  of  the  Mysteries. 
Sunday  of  Pentecost,  (Whitsunday.) 

The  Apostles. 

The  Washing. 

The  Genuflection. 

Seventh  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

Matins,  Resurrection  (Easter)  Day. 

Oblation,  Resurrection  (Easter)  Day. 

For  the  Dead. 

Fiftii  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

Tuesday,  4th  Week  in  Lent. 

Matins,  Saturday  of  Annunciation. 
Fourth  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

Thursday,  4th  Week  in  Lent. 

*Consecration  of  the  Chrism. 
.*Basil  and  his  Associates. 


APPENDIX    I. 


483 


Lessons  for  Public  Worship — Continued. 


2  CORINTHIANS. 

Lessons. 

Chap,  and  Ver. 

VI. 

iv.    1-  6. 

VII. 

7-18. 

VIII. 

V.    1-10. 

IX. 

11-19. 

X. 

i 

20-     ) 
vi.  10.      } 

XI. 

• 

11-    ) 
vii.    3.     S 

XII. 

4-16. 

XIII. 

viii.    1-  8. 

XIV. 

9-24. 

XV. 

k.    1-15. 

XVI. 

X.    1-18. 

XVII. 

xi.    1-15. 

XVIII. 

■ 

xii.  18.      \ 

XIX. 

{ 

19-     J 

xiii.  13.    ) 

GALATIANS. 

I. 

i.    1-10. 

II. 

11-24. 

III. 

ii.    1-10. 

IV. 

11-16. 

V. 

17-iii.  14./ 
15-29.)" 

VI. 

iv.     1-18. 

VII. 

19-27. 

VIII. 

28-    ) 
V.  12.      \ 

IX. 

{ 

13-    } 
vi.    6.      S 

X. 

7-18. 

EPHESIANS. 

I. 

i.     1-14. 

11. 

i 

ii.    3.     \ 

III. 

4-18. 

IV. 

19-    ) 
iii.  12.      \ 

V. 

13-21. 

VI. 

iv.    1-16. 

VII. 

17-24. 

VIII. 

■ 

25-    } 
V.    2.      f 

IX. 

3-21. 

X. 

■ 

22-    ) 
vi.     9.      \ 

XI. 

10-20. 

OCCASIONS. 


Third  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 
*The  JMartyrs. 
*The  Dead. 

New  Sunday,  (Whitsunday.) 

Sunday  commencing  Lent:  and,  Rogations. 

Friday,  1st  Week  in  Lent. 

Any  Day. 

Any  Day. 

Sixlh  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

Mid-Lent. 

Sixth  Sunday  in  Lent. 

Monday,  4th  Week  in  Lent. 

Commemoration  of  Paul. 
Friday  of  Mid-Lent, 


For  any  Day. 

Fpr  Stephen. 
*For  the  Patriarchs. 

For  any  Day. 
*The  Adoration  of  the  Cross. 
*The  Annunciation  of  the  Mother  of  God, 

Oblation,  on  the  Nativity,  (Christmas.) 

The  Nativity  of  John. 

The  Circumcision  of  our  Lord. 

The  3d  Sunday  in  Lent. 

Matins,  Wednesday  of  Passion  Week. 

For  Baptisms. 

After  the  Resurrection,  (on  Easter  Day.) 

Thursday  of  Repose. 

Thursday  after  the  Resurrection. 

*EIevation  of  the  Cross. 
Ascension  of  our  Lord. 
New  Sunday,  (Whitsunday.) 

Friday  of  Repose. 

Seventli  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

For  any  Day. 

*The  Tonsure  of  Monks. 


484 


APPENDIX    I. 


Lessons  for  Public  Worship — Continued. 


PHILIPPIANS. 

OCCASIONS. 

Lessons. 

Chap,  aiid  Ver. 

I. 

i.    1-1  ]. 

For  any  Day. 

II. 

12-2U. 

Comiiienionition  of  Peter  and  Paul. 

III. 

ii.    1-11. 

Twilight,  Wednesday  of  Passion  Week. 

IV. 

12-30. 

For  any  Diiy. 

V. 

iii.     1-12. 

For  any  Day. 

VI. 

■ 

.     13-    ) 
IV.    7.      \ 

For  any  Day, 

VII. 

8-23. 

For  any  Day. 

COLOSSIANS. 

1. 1  i.      1-   8. 

II.  I  9-20. 

u.    5.      \ 

6-15. 

16-23. 

iii.     1-17. 


IV 

V. 
VI. 


■\\    iv.  18.      \ 


VII 


1  THESSALONIANS, 
I 


II. 
III. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 


.?•  1-  } 

11.  12.      f 

13-16 

17- 
iii.  13 
iv.     1-12 

13- 
V.  11 

12-28 


\    in.  13.      \ 
iv.     1-12. 

\      v.lt    } 


For  any  Day. 

4th  Sunday  after  the  Resurrection, 

Thursday  after  the  Resurrection. 

Mid-Day,  Friday  of  the  Crucifi.xion. 

For  any  Day. 

Wednesday  of  tlie  Week  of  Repose. 

For  any  Day. 


For  any  Day. 

Twilight,  Saturday  of  the  Annunciation. 
For  any  Day. 
For  Baptism. 
*For  the  Dead. 
Fourth  Sunday  in  Lent. 


2  THESSALONIANS 
I, 


]    iii'  19      C    Twiliglit  on  Epiphany. 


1  TIMOTHY. 


I. 
II. 

III. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 


1-20. 
1-15 
1- 


i ;;:  I:  \ 


9 
V.  23 

23- 
vi.  12. 

13-21 


I    VI.  12.      \ 


Frid;iy,  5th  Week  in  Lent. 
For  Rogations. 

Second  Sunday  after  Epipliany. 

Tiiursday  after  the  Resurrection. 

Fifth  Sunday  in  Lent 

Fiflh  Sunday  after  the  Resurrection. 


2  TIMOTHY. 


I.  [     ••'    2~     t|*Commeinoration  of  Aegenetus  and  Companions, 


APPENDIX    I. 


485 


Lessons  for 


Public  Worship — Continued. 


2  TIMOTHY. 


OCCASIONS. 


II. 
III. 

IV. 
V. 


Chap,  aud  Ver. 


I     ill    9.      \ 


liv 


ii.    4- 
iii.    9 

10-15. 

16- 

s 


*  Commemoration  of  Peter  of  Alexandria. 
♦Commemoration  of  our  Lord  Severus. 
*0n  the  death  of  a  Bishop. 


9-22.  *Commemoration  of  Gregory. 


TITUS. 
PHILEMON. 


I. 


On  making  a  Presbyter. 

At  Baptism :  also,  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 


1-25.1  For  any  Day. 


HEBREWS 
I.'        ' 
II. 
III. 


5-13. 
\    iu.  13.     \ 


IV 
V. 

VI. 

VII. 
VIII, 

IX 

X 

XI. 

XII 

XIII. 

XIV 

XV. 

XVI. 
XVII. 

XVIII. 

XIX. 
XX. 


j  viii.    1-    ) 
I    i.x.  10.     \ 


I., 


1- 

4 

5- 
14- 
13. 
14- 
13. 
14- 
11. 
12- 
20 
1 

18 
1 

10 

11 

16 
1 

15 

26 

39 
7. 


\    vi.  20.     ) 


X.    1- 


15 

■28 
14. 
25 
■38 

'-    \ 


XXII. 


;-31 


\   xii.    2.     \ 


■11. 

-27. 


xui. 


9-25 


Twilight  and  Matins,  on  the  Nativity. 
First  Station,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 
*  For  the  Mother  of  God. 
Saturday  in  Albis,  (Whitsun  Week.) 
Second  Station,  Friday  Night  of  the  Crucifixion. 

Second  Night  in  Passion  Week. 

*For  the  Mother  of  God. 
Tuesday  in  Albis,  (Whitsun  Week.) 
The  Nativity:  and, 

The  Consecration  of  a  Church,  or  an  Altar. _ 
Third  Station,  Friday  Night  of  the  Crucifixion. 
Twilight,  Tiiursday  of  the  Jlysteries. 

Tiiird^Sunday  after  the  Resurrection. 
*Niglit  of  Blessing  Water. 

For  Baptism. 

Matins,  Monday  in  Passion  Week. 

Twilight,  Tuesday  in  Passion  Week, 

Slaughter  of  the  Infants. 

The  Prophets,  Apostles,  *and  Patriarchs. 

"  When  there  is  Wrath,"  (Time  of  Calamity.) 

Oblation  on  the  Forty,  (Quadragesima?) 
*The  318  Fathers,  (Council  of  Nice:)  _ 
*Also,  Commemoration  of  believing  Kings. 

Ninth  Hour,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 


486 


APPENDIX    I. 


Lessons  for  Public  Worship — Continued. 


JAMES. 


JLussuns. 


I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 
VI.  I 


Chap,  and  Ver. 


S    m. 
'(    iv. 


OCCASIONS, 


i.    1-21.    Commemoration  of  the  Martyrs. 

(  ''2—    ) 

]      ..    !"„"    (    Second  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

14-26.    Eleventh  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

„""    [    Third  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

Twelfth  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

Fourth  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 


G.      i 
7-20. 


1  PETER. 

I.i        i.  1-25 

II.!       ii.  1-10 

IV.I  7-15 


Ii 


VI. 
VII. 


iv.    G.      f 

7-19. 

V.    1-14. 


2  PETER. 

)      ii.    8. 
liji  «-    ' 


il    ni.  1& 


8.      ) 


1  JOHN. 
I. 


1.  1- 

ii.  (I 

ii-lj  -  ;~ 

\i    m.  ]. 
III.  I 

IV.! 

v.:  11-21 


New  Sunday,  (Whitsunday.) 
Fifth  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

John  the  Baptist. 

Si.xth  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 
Thirteenth  Sunday  after  Pentecost : 
And,  at  Consecration  of  Bishops. 
Seventh  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 
Fourteenth  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 


VI. 


Lesson  for  Mount  Tabor. 
Great  Feast  of  Ascension. 

First  Sunday  after  the  Nativity. 

Oblation,  Hosanna  (Palm)  Sunday. 

-2l.j*Tlie  Mother  of  God. 
1-10.    Nativity  of  our  Lord. 

Tlie  mystical  Washing  :  and, 

Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

The  Feast  of  Lights,  (Candlemas.) 


V.     1-21 


2  JOHN. 

V 

3  JOHN. 
I. 


JUDE. 

L! 


1-n 


1-15. 


Entrance  of  our  Lord  into  the  Temple. 


Wednesday,  2d  Week  in  Lent :  and, 
Wednesday  in  Passion  Week'. 


l-25.j*Anthony  and  his  Companions  : 
Tuesday  in  Passion  VVeek  : 
Also,  tlie  Prophets. 


APPENDIX    I.  487 


The  Apocalypse  is  not  divided  into  Lessons,  nor  is  it,  in  the  London 
editions,  broken  into  Paragraphs,  but  is  printed  in  one  solid  mass.  Yet  it 
has  the  Chapters  and  Verses  noted  in  the  margin,  like  the  other  Books. 

The  Four  Gospels  ct^ntain  24S  Lessons,  of  which  7  are  unappropriated, 
or  serre  tor  any  day,  and  the  remaining  241  serve  for  252  different  occa- 
sions. The  Acts  and  the  Epistles  (which  are  collectivelv  called  the 
Apostles)  contain  242  Lessons,  of  which  20  are  unappropriated,  and  the 
remaining  222  serve  for  241  oc-caaonsw  On  mc«t  of  the  occasions,  there  was 
one  Lesson  appointed  from  the  Gospels,  and  one  also  from  the  Apostles. 

This  Table  designates  the  Lessons  for  forty  succesive  Sundays,  from 
the  Sunday  betore  the  Nativity  onward  to  the  14th  Sunday  after  Pente- 
cost. Tlie  remaining  twelve  Sundays  appear  not  to  have  been  always 
designated  in  the  same  manner  by  the  Syrian  Christians,  and  therefore 
they  are  not  provided  for  in  the  London  editions,  which  we  follow. 
Asseman  tells  us,  (BibKoth.  Orient.  Clem.  Yat.  torn.  i.  p.  530,  note.)  that 
the  Chaldean  Christians  denominate  the  four  Sun'iays  nest  before  Christ- 
mas, Adeent  Sundays,  and  the  four  prec-eding  them,  Sundays  of  the 
Consecration  of  Churches.  Other  Syrian  Christians  designated  the  Sundays 
in  the  latter  part  of  the  ec-desiastical  year,  by  the  Gospels  that  were 
read. 

The  Sundays  mentioiie«i  in  this  Table,  derive  their  names  fr>;m  the  two 
immovable  Festivals,  the  jyativity,  (|,^-»,  Christmas,  December  25th,)  and 
Epiphany,  (].»aJ9,  January  6th ;)  and  fit)m  the  movable  Feasts  depend^it 
on  the  day  of  our  Lord's  Resurrection,  (pv>«  ri  )  that  is,  ^  "      '     . 

From  the  Xativity  are  name»l  the  Sundays  before,  and  the 
Christmas.     From  Epiphany  are  nam.ed  the  seven  Sundays  after  Epiph- 
any, if  there  should  be  so  many  before  Lent  commences.     The  Sundays 
in  Lent  (|l00.,  the  Fast\  are  numbered  1st  to  the  6th  in  Lent.     Then 
follows   Hosanna   {Jz  or  Palm)  Sunday,  which  is   the   Sunday 

before  Easter.  The  v  .-.  .  .:.re  Easter  is  cailetl  Passion  Week,  being  the 
week  on  which  our  Lord  was  crucified.  The  Thursday  of  that  week  was 
calle^i  Thursday  of  the  ilysteries,  because  on  that  day  Clirist  instituted 
the  Holy  Supj:>er.  The  Friday  of  that  week  was  c-alleti  Friday  of  the 
'  Crucifixion.  The  Sunday  following  was  the  great  Sunday  of  our  Lord's 
Resurrection,  ( |J  V?  i  C)  or  Easter  Day.  The  jire  next  suecee«iing  Sun- 
days were  called  the  seojnd  to  the  sixth  after  the  Resurrection ;  after  which 
came  the  Sun«3ay  oi Pentecost,  (•*  ;^^^  ^  *  1  ^  '^  )  colled  also  Kew  Sunday, 
and  Sunday  in  White,  (in  Albb.)  Whit-Sunday  ;  and  the  succeeding  week 


488  APPENDIX    I. 


was  called   the    Week  in    White,    (in  Albis,)  Whitsun-Week.     This  was 
followed  by  fourteen  Sundays,  named  the  ^rst,  second,  &,c.,  after  Pentecost. 

Besides  the  forty  Sundays  provided  for  as  above,  this  Table  assigns 
particular  Lessons  for  the  Nativity  of  our  Lord,  or  Christmas  Day ;  for 
Epiphany,  and  the  annual  Consecration  of  Water  on  that  Festival ;  for 
daily  public  worship  during  the  six  weeks  of  Lent,  and  the  week  before 
Easter,  or  Passion  Week ;  also  for  the  annual  Consecration  of  the  Chrism 
on  Thursday  of  Passion  Week,  and  for  daily  worship  throughout  the  week 
in  Albis,  or  Whitsun-Week.  The  other  appropriations  are  for  Saints' 
Days,  commemoration  of  Martyrs,  Ordinations,  Baptisms,  &c. 


APPENDIX    IL 

THE  SYPJAC  TRANSLATIONS  OF  THE  SCRIPTURES. 


There  are  three  Syriac  translations  of  the  New  Testament,  which  are 
denominated  the  Peshito,  the  Fhiloxenian,  and  the  Hierosolymitan  versions  ; 
and  also  two  Syriac  translations  of  the  Old  Testament,  which  are  known 
by  the  designations  of  the  Peshlto,  and  the  Syriac  Hexapla.  Of  thejirst 
of  these  five  versions,  the  Peshito  Neio  Testament,  it  is  here  proposed  to 
give  a  pretty  full  account ;  and  then  to  treat,  more  summarily,  of  the  other 
versions  in  their  order. 

THE  PESHITO  SYRIAC  VERSION  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

CHARACTER    AND     CONTENTS    OF    THIS    VERSION. 

This  is  not  only  much  older  than  the  Philoxenian  or  the  later  Syriac 
version,  but  is  very  generally  admitted  to  be  the  oldest  version  that  has 
come  down  to  us,  of  the  New  Testament  in  any  language.  It  is  called  by 
the  Syrians  the  Peshito  version,  on  account  of  its  style  or  character.  The 
Syriac  verb  -^  ^'^  signifies  to  unfold  or  spread  out  that  which  was  folded 
up,  so  that  it  can  be  seen  in  its  true  form,  dimensions,  and  character. 
Hence  the  participle  ]  ^  »  *  <^  signifies  spread  out,  not  involved  or  folded  up, 
simplex  and  not  duplex  ;  or,  as  applied  to  a  translation,  explicit,  free  f'Om, 
ambiguities,  direct,  simple,  and  easy  to  be  understood.  And  precisely  such 
is,  in  fact,  the  character  of  this  venerable  version.* 

*  It  was  therefore  a  great  mistake  of  Bertholdt,  (in  his  Einleitung  in  das  Alt.  u.  Neuc 
Testament,  §  18,  vol.  i.  ii.  p.  593,)  to  suppose,  that  this  version  was  called  the  Peshito, 
because  it  was  the  version  in  common  use,  among  the  sects  of  Syrian  Christians ;  thus 
making  the  word  Peshito  equivalent  to  the  Greek  r]  xoivvg,  and  the  Latin  vulgata. 
The  word  does  not  denote  an  expansion  or  extension  ad  extera,  or  over  a  larger  space, 
but  an  internal  development,  an  unfolding,  which  exhibits  the  thing  in  its  fair  and 
full  proportions. 


490  APPENDIX    II. 


The  Peshito  version  embraces  all  the  canonical  books  of  the  New  Tes- 
tament, except  the  second  Epistle  of  Peter,  the  second  and  third  Epistles 
oi  Jolin^  the  Epistle  oi  Jude,  and  the  Apocalypse;  that  is,  all  the  ypatpal 
6^oXo^oi}/xfvai  of  Eusebius,  together  with  one  only  of  the  avriXsyhfxsvai 
viz.,  the  Epistle  of  James.  Thus  the  Peshito  Caiion  embraces  all  the 
books,  which  were  universally  admitted  to  be  genuine  m  the  early  ages  of 
the  Church ;  and  it  excludes  all  but  one  of  the  books  concerning  which 
there  was  for  a  time  doubt  and  uncertainty.  It  is  almost  precisely  the 
same  with  the  Canon  derived  from  the  writings  of  Irenteus,  Tertullian,  and 
others  in  the  first  ages  of  the  Church.  And  this  may  be  considered  as 
evidence  of  the  high  antiquity  of  the  version.  It  was  made  before  the 
New  Testament  Canon  was  fidly  settled. 

THE    TIME,    PLACE,    AND     AUTHORS    OF'  THIS    VERSION. 

Among  the  Aramaean  Christians  the  tradition  is  universal,  and  uniform 
everywhere,  that  this  version  was  made  at  the  time  when  Christianity  was 
first  preached,  and  when  Christian  churches  were  first  established,  in  Syria 
and  Mesopotamia  :  and,  of  course,  that  it  was  made  by  some  one  or  more 
of  the  primitive  Apostles  and  Evangelists,  or  by  persons  who  were  their 
companions  and  associates.  Some  name  Mark  the  Evangelist;  others, 
Thaddeus  the  reputed  Apostle  of  Mesopotamia ;  others,  Achaeus  or  Ag- 
kaeus,  a  pupil  and  immediate  successor  of  Thaddeus. 

Anterior  to  the  present  century,  most  of  the  Europeans  ^ho  gave 
attention  to  Syriac  learning,  so  far  assented  to  this  Syrian  tradition,  as  to 
maintain,  that  the  Peshito  version  must  have  been  made  either  by  an 
Apostle,  or  by  some  companion  and  assistant  of  the  Apostles.  A  few, 
however,  men  of  talents  and  erudition,  but  not  versed  in  Syriac  learning, — 
e.  g.  Bp.  Fuller,  Grotius,  and  J.  J.  Wctstein, — maintained  that  the  Philox- 
eniaii  was  the  only  Syriac  version  of  the  New  Testament;  and  that,  as 
this  version  was  not  made  till  the  sixth  century,  of  course  that  must  be  the 
date  of  our  Syriac  New  Testament.  Such  reasoning  needs  no  confutation 
at  the  present  day.  And  accordingly,  since  the  middle  of  the  last  century, 
all  the  learned  men  of  Europe  seem  to  be  agreed,  that  the  Peshito  version 
was  probably  in  existence  in  the  latter  part  of  the  second  century,  and 
certainly  in  the  beginning  of  the  third.  Thus  Michaelis,  Storr,  Adler, 
Eichhorn,  Ilvg,  JSertholdl,  Hoffman,  Uhlmann,  Home,  Guerike,  Roedi- 
gcr,  &c. 

The  more  recent  German  writers  content  themselves  with  tracing  back 
the  existence  of  this  version  to  the  latter  part  of  the  second  century.     But 


APPENDIX    II.  •  491 


the  English,  and  also  the  Germans  before  the  year  1800,  very  generally 
believed,  and  argued,  that  it  must  have  been  made  either  near  the  close 
of  the  Jirst  century,  or  early  in  the  second  century.  Says  the  Rev.  T.  IT. 
Home,  in  his  Introduction,  (vol.  i.  p.  270.  ed.  New  York,  1844)  :  "Bishop 
Walton,  Cai-pzov,  Leusden,  Bishop  Loioth,  and  Dr.  Kermicott,  fix  its  date 
to  the^^rs^  century ;  Bauer,  and  some  other  German  writers,  to  the  second 
or  third  century ;  Jahn  fixes  it,  at  the  least,  to  the  second  century ;  De 
Rossi  pronounces  it  to  be  very  ancient,  but  does  not  specify  any  precise 
date.  The  most  probable  opinion,  (he  adds,)  is  that  of  Michaclis,  (Intro- 
'duction  to  New  Testament,  vol.  ii.  P.  I.  pp.  29-38.)  Avho  ascribes  the  Syriac 
version  of  both  Testaments  to  the  close  of  the  first,  or  to  the  earlier  part 
of  the  second  century;  at  which  time  the  Syrian  churches  flourished  most, 
and  the  Christians  at  Edcssa  had  a  temple  for  divine  worship  erected  after 
the  model  of  that  at  Jerusalem :  and  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  they 
would  be  without  a  version  of  the  Old  Testament,  the  reading  of  which  had 
been  introduced  by  the  Apostles." 

Those  who  attempt  to  trace  back  the  existence  of  this  version,  by  means 
of  historical  proofs,  tell  us,  that  the  Peshito  version  certainly  existed,  and 
was  in  common  use,  in  the  middle  of  the  fourth  century.  For,  at  that 
period,  Ephraim  Syrus  composed  his  voluminous  writings,  which  abound 
in  quotations  and  expositions  of  the  sacred  books,  as  they  are  found  in  this 
version.  And  going  back  of  that  period,  we  are  able  to  trace  a  solid 
Christian  literature,  and  a  series  of  well-informed  theologians  reaching  up 
to  the  age  of  Bardesanes,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  second  century.  Now 
such  able  theologians,  and  such  a  Christian  literature,  could  not  have 
existed  without  a  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures :  and  yet,  through  all  this 
period,  we  have  no  intimation  that  the  Aramaean  churches  lacked  the  holy 
Scriptures  in  their  vernacular  tongue.  We  therefore  infer  that  the  Peshito 
version  existed,  and  was  in  common  use  from  at  least  as  early  as  the  latter 
part  of  the  second  century.  And  this  inference  seems  to  have  the  support 
of  direct  testimony.  For  Euscbius  says,  (IT.  E.  iv.  22.)  that  Hegesippus, 
(who  lived  and  wrote  about  a.  d.  188,)  "made  some  quotations  from 
the  Gospel  according  to  the  Hebrews,  and  from  the  Syriac  Gospel ;" — 
iy.  TS  Tou  xaS'  l/Spaiouj  suayysXi'ou  Y.ai  tou  tfupiaxou.  Tin's  language  (as 
Hng  has  clearly  shown :  Einleitung,  vol.  i.  p.  367,  ed.  1826)  implies  that 
there  was,  in  the  days  of  Hegesippus,  a  Syriac  Gospel,  and  that  it  was  a 
different  book  from  the  Gospel  according  to  the  Hebrews. — And  in  the 
Passio  Sancti  Procopii  Martyris,  (annexed  by  Valesius  to  the  Hist.  Eccles. 
of  Eusebius,  lib.  viii.  c.  1,  ed.  Amsterdam,  1695.  Annotatt,  p.  154,)  the 
martyr  is  said  to  have  been  born  at  Jerusalem,  and  to  have  passed  his 
life  at  Scythopolis,  where  he  performed  three  functions  in  the  church, — 


492  .  APPENDIX    II. 


"  unum  in  legend!  officio,  alterum  hi  Si/ri  interpretat'ione  sermonis,  et  ter- 
tium  advcrsus  daemones  manus  impositione  consummans ;"  until  his 
martyrdom,  under  Diocletian,  a.  d.  303.  The  words  Syri  interpretatione 
sennonis,  explicitly,  make  him  the  public  translator,  (of  the  Scriptures, 
undoubtedly,)  from  the  Syriac  language  into  some  other,  the  Greek,  most 
probably:  for  we  may  suppose  there  were  some  Greeks  in  the  Syrian 
church  of  Scythopolis,  for  whose  benefit  the  Scripture  lessons  were  trans- 
lated as  they  Avere  read. 

The  arguments  for  carrying  back  the  origin  of  this  version  to  the  last 
part  of  the  first  century  and  the  first  part  of  the  second,  are  the  follow- 
ing :— 

1.  This  accords  Avith  the  constant  and  uniform  tradition  of  all  the 
Aramaean  churches,  Nestorian,  Monophysite,  Melchite,  and  Maronite ;  in 
all  of  which  this  version  has  been  in  public  use,  time  out  of  mind,  and  has 
ever  been  revered  as  coeval  with  the  origin  of  those  churches.  IMoreover, 
there  is  no  contradictory  tradition  from  any  quarter;  nor  does  ecclesiastical 
history  afford  any  invalidating  testimony.  All  the  evidence  in  the  case  is 
therefore  on  one  side,  or  stands  uncontradicted  and  unopposed  by  any  con- 
trary evidence.  By  what  laws  of  historic  reasoning,  then,  can  the  tradition 
just  referred  to  be  set  aside "? 

2.  The  uncertainty  which  is  found  in  the  tradition,  respecting  the  pre- 
cise time,  and  place,  and  author  of  this  version,  is  good  evidence  of  the  truth 
of  the  tradition;  for  it  shows,  that  this  version  was  made  at  so  early  a 
period,  that  the  particular  circumstances  attending  its  formation  were  hid 
in  obscurity. 

This  argument  may  be  thus  stated : — We  know,  that  there  was  an 
uninterrupted  series  of  learned  writers  in  the  Aramaean  churches,  from  the 
times  of  Bardesanes,  who  was  cotemporary  with  Ireneeus  and  Clemens 
Alex.,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  second  century, — down  to  Barhebrceus  in 
the  thirteenth  century.  Yet  not  one  of  them  could  authenticate  the  uni- 
versal tradition,  or  trace  it  to  its  source,  or  correct  the  minuter  details  of 
it.  They  could  only  repeat  the  generally  received  fact,  that  this  version 
was  made  when  their  first  churches  were  planted  by  the  Apostles  and  their 
coadjutors;  and  then  give  their  conjectures  respecting  the  precise  time, 
and  i)lace,  and  author  of  the  version.  And  the  early  Greek  Fathers,  many 
of  whom  lived  in  Syria  and  Palestine,  were  equally  in  the  dark  respecting 
these  points.  Now  the  fair  inference  from  these  facts  is,  that  the  transla- 
tion must  have  been  made  in  the  very  earliest  times  of  the  Church,  and  so 
long  before  the  days  of  the  learned  ecclesiastical  writers, — (that  is,  before 
the  times  of  Justin  Martyr,  Irenteus,  Bardesanes,  Clemens  Alex,,  &c.) — 
that  the  circumstances  of  the  time,  place,  and  author  of  the  version  could 


APPENDIX   II.  493 


not  be  ascertained,  and  therefore  the  door  was  open  for  different  conjectures 
respecting  them. 

For  the  due  appreciation  of  this  argument,  it  should  be  recollected,  that 
from  the  termination  of  the  New  Testament  narratives  to  about  the  middle 
of  the  second  century, — (that  is,  for  about  60  or  80  years,) — the  only 
Christian  writers  were  those  called  the  Apostolic  Fathers  ;  whose  writings 
are  few  and  meagre,  and  scarcely  throw  any  light  on  sacred  literature  and 
the  occurrences  in  the  churches.  Hence,  that  early  period  was,  emphatically, 
the  OBSCURE  AGE  of  the  Church,  and  one  which  it  has  baffled  the  attempts 
of  learned  theologians  to  explore,  from  the  times  of  Eusebius  to  the  present 
day.  After  that  period,  learned  Christian  writers  began  to  arise,  and  to 
multiply  more  and  more;  so  that  from  that  time  onward,  and  especially 
after  the  commencement  of  the  third  century,  all  the  more  important 
occurrences  in  the  Church  became  tolerably  well  known,  being  mentioned 
by  the  cotemporary  writers  ;  while  all  that  occurred  in  the  latter  part  of 
the  first  century,  and  in  the  first  half  of  the  second,  is  almost  as  little  known 
as  the  events  before  the  flood. 

This  argument  receives  confirmation  from  the  fict,  that  the  very  early 
translation  of  the  Scriptures  into  Latin,  (which  no  one  calls  in  question.)  is 
exactly  parallel  with  this  asserted  early  origin  of  the  Syriac  version.  Both 
versions  were  supposed  to  have  been  made  in  the  times  of  the  Apostles,  or 
shortly  after,  and  by  an  author,  or  authors,  unknown  to  the  subsequent 
ages.  The  chief  difference  in  regard  to  them  is,  that  there  are  said  to  have 
been  several  early  Latin  versions,  one  of  which,  being  superior  to  the  others, 
obtained  the  greatest  cii'culation,  and  was  called  the  Itala,  whereas  we 
read  of  only  one  early  Syriac  version,  that  called  the  Peshito.  Augustine's 
declaration  concerning  those  early  Latin  versions  is  well  known.  He  savs, 
(de  Doctrina  Christ.  1.  ii.  c.  11  :)  "One  can  easily  enumerate  those  who 
translated  the  holy  Scriptures  from  Hebrew  into  Greek  ;  but  not  so,  the 
Latin  translators.  For,  in  those  early  times  of  Christianity,  whoever  got 
hold  of  a  Greek  MS.,  and  thought  he  possessed  some  knowledge  of  both 
languages,  at  once  undertook  to  translate  it." — In  regard  to  these  very 
early  versions,  both  Latin  and  Syriac,  the  entire  ignorance  of  all  the  learned 
fathers,  in  subsequent  ages,  as  to  their  authors,  and  as  to  the  precise  time 
and  place  of  their  composition,  arises  from  the  same  causes;  namely,  the 
very  early  period  at  which  the  versions  were  made,  and  the  scantiness  of 
the  records  of  those  times.  And  hence  the  vagueness,  or  the  want  of 
uniformity  and  consistency  in  the  details,  is  the  very  best  internal  evidence 
of  the  general  truth  and  authenticity  of  both  traditions. 

3.  The  character  and  circimistances  of  the  first  Syrian  Christians,  and 
of  their  teachers,  would  both  demand  and  facilitate  an  early  translation 


494  APPENDIX    II. 


of  the  New  Testament  into  the  common  language  of  the  country.  The 
first  converts  of  that  country  were,  doubtless,  to  a  great  extent,  from  among 
Jews.  And  we  know  that  the  first  Christians  were,  generally,  from  the 
humbler  walks  of  life,  or  from  the  common  people, — that  class  of  persons 
Avho,  in  Syria  and  Mesopotamia,  spoke  and  understood  no  language  but 
the  Syriac.  An  early  translation  of  the  Scriptures  into  this  language  was 
therefore  exceedingly  necessary.  Indeed,  it  was  nearly  indispensable  for 
the  due  instruction  of  the  new  converts,  and  for  qualifying  their  principal 
men  to  be  teachers  and  guides  in  the  new-formed  churches.  What  modern 
missionary  attempts  to  propagate  Christianity,  and  to  establish  Christian 
churches,  in  any  unevangelized  country,  without  at  once  putting  the  Bible 
into  the  hands  of  the  common  people,  in  a  language  they  can  understand  ? 
— ^The  first  preachers  of  the  Gospel  in  Syria  and  Mesopotamia,  and  the 
founders  of  the  first  Aramaean  churches,  we  may  suppose,  were  for  the 
most  part  Palestine  Jews.  For  such  were  all  the  Apostles,  the  seventy 
disciples,  the  seven  Deacons,  and  among  the  Evangelists,  Mark,  Barnabas, 
Silas,  and  perhaps  others.  But  to  all  the  Jews  of  Palestine,  an  Aramaean 
dialect  very  similar  to  the  Syriac,  was  vernacular,  and  was  the  ordinary 
language  of  all  public  addresses  in  the  synagogues  of  their  country.  Hence 
we  may  suppose,  that  the  Gospel  was  first  preached  among  the  Syrians 
in  the  Aramaean  language,  either  in  pure  Syriac  or  in  the  dialect  of  the 
Jews.  And  if  so,  the  first  founders  of  the  Syrian  churches  were  fully 
competent,  to  give  them  Syriac  translations  of  the  several  books  of  the 
New  Testament,  as  soon  as  they  successively  arrived  in  the  country.  And 
we  can  hardly  suppose  it  possible,  that  they  would  neglect  a  work  so  easy 
of  accomplishment,  so  necessary  to  lighten  their  own  labors,  and  so  indis- 
pensable to  the  full  establishment  and  permanent  prosperity  of  the  chui-ches. 
4.  The  character  of  the  version  itself  affords  evidence  that  it  was  pro- 
duced in  the  very  earliest  ages  of  the  Christian  Church.  Its  style  has  all 
the  simplicity  and  directness  of  those  sincere  and  honest-hearted  men  who 
first  propagated  Christianity.  It  is,  precisely,  what  its  name  Peshito 
implies — a  perfectly  explicit  and  lucid  version,  every  word  of  which  seems 
to  be  the  spontaneous  efflux  of  a  warm  heart,  and  of  a  mind  fully  master 
of  its  own  conceptions.  There  is  no  pomp  of  words,  no  artificial  construc- 
tions or  phraseology,  nothing  that  betrays  vanity  or  ostentation,  nothing 
factitious,  elaborate,  and  studied.  It  exhibits  no  undue  veneration  fur  the 
technical  terms  of  the  new  religion,  or  of  the  Church  and  its  organization. 
Indeed,  it  seems  not  to  know  that  there  are  technical  words  and  phiases, 
belonging  to  the  new  dispensation.  And  although  it  is  the  translation  of 
a  sacred  book,  it  seems  to  have  no  superstitious  reverence  for  the  mere 
words,  the  phraseology,  or  the  grammatical  constructions  of  the  original 


APPENDIX    II.  495 


text.  To  give  the  substance  of  what  is  written,  and  in  the  plainest, 
simplest  manner  possible,  seems  to  be  its  sole  aim.  In  these  respects  it 
stands  alone  among  all  the  ancient  versions  of  the  Bible ;  and  especially 
is  it  totally  unlike  the  second  Syriac  version,  which  will  be  described  here- 
after. And  this  fascinating  artlessness  of  the  Peshito  version,  while  it 
aflbrds  strong  evidence  of  its  very  early  formation,  will  account  for  its 
permanent  and  very  strong  hold  on  the  affections  of  all  Aramaean  Chris- 
tians in  every  age  of  the  Church. 

5.  If  this  version  was  not  made  till  near  the  end  of  the  second  century, 
it  is  utterly  unaccountable  that  neither  any  notice  of  the  time,  place,  and 
circumstances  of  its  formation,  nor  any  intimation  whatever  of  its  recent 
origin,  can  be  found  in  any  cotemporary,  or  any  subsequent  ecclesiastical 
writer,  Syrian,  Greek,  or  Latin.  For  if  the  Aramaean  Christians  had 
been  destitute  of  the  holy  Scriptures  in  a  language  they  could  understand, 
during  one  hundred  and  fifty  years,  and  had  then  first  received  the  full  light 
of  the  Gospel  from  this  translation,  surely  the  publication  of  it  must  have 
produced  an  astonishing  change  in  the  character  and  condition  of  the  Ara- 
maean churches.  It  must  have  formed  a  grand  epoch  in  their  history ;  and 
the  learned  writers  of  those  times,  witnessing  the  wonderful  changes  that 
occurred,  could  not  have  failed  to  notice  them,  and  to  dwell  on  them  with 
wonder  and  delight.  And  yet  no  notice  is  taken  of  any  such  occurrences 
by  any  writer  of  those  times,  either  Syrian  or  Greek.  Surely  this  is  Tcry 
strange ;  and  the  advocates  of  this  hypothesis  may  be  challenged  to  produce 
a  parallel  case  in  the  whole  history  of  the  Christian  Church.  For  what 
other  equally  venerated  version  can  be  named  that  was  made  as  late  as 
A.  D.  200,  and  for  so  numerous  a  body  of  Christians,  previously  for  ages 
destitute  of  a  vernacular  Bible,  the  formation  of  which  is  not  noticed,  nor 
even  alluded  to,  by  so  numerous  a  body  of  writers,  all  deeply  interested 
in  the  momentous  transaction  ? 

If  these  arguments,  collectively,  afford  satisflictory  evidence  in  the  case, 
then  we  are  to  believe  that  most  of  the  books  called  6[/,oXoyoJ,a?vai,  or 
the  greater  part  of  those  forming  the  proper  Peshito  Canon,  were  translated 
in  the  latter  part  of  the  first  century,  for  so  early  they  must  have  been 
well  known  in  Syria,  having  been  written  before  the  destruction  of  Jeru- 
salem, A.  D.  70. — The  only  books  forming  an  exception  are  the  Gospel 
and  the  Epistles  of  St.  John,  which,  if  written  (as  many  suppose)  near 
the  end  of  the  century,  may  not  have  reached  Syria  in  time  to  be  trans- 
lated before  the  commencement  of  the  second  century. — The  Peshito  dvn- 
'Ksyhiisva.i  (namely,  the  2d  Epistle  of  Peter,  the  2d  and  3d  of  John,  the 
Epistle  of  Judo,  and  the  Apocalypse)  were  undoubtedly  translated  con- 
siderably later.     Their  style,  which  differs  somewhat  from  the  rest  of  the 


496  APPENDIX    II. 


Peshito,  and  approximates  towards  that  of  the  Philozenian,  is  evidence  of 
this,  ffuff,  indeed,  (Introduction,  i.  p.  356.)  maintains  that  these  books 
originally  formed  a  part  of  the  Peshito  Canon,  and  were  afterwards  left 
out  of  it ;  while  others  maintain  that  they  belong  exclusively  to  the 
Philoxenian  version.  Neither  of  these  opinions  is  admissible.  For  if, 
according  to  Hug,  they  originally  belonged  to  the  Peshito  version,  it  is 
strange  that  they  should  difl'er  so  much  from  the  usual  style  of  the  Peshito, 
and  also  that  they  are  found,  almost  invariably,  omitted  in  the  MSS.  of 
this  version.  The  opinion  that  they  belong  to  the  Philoxenian  version,  is 
equally  objectionable,  for  the  style  of  these  books  coincides  more  with 
that  of  the  Peshito  than  with  that  of  the  Philoxenian,  though  differing  from 
both.  It  is,  moreover,  scarcely  supposable,  that  these  important  books 
remained  unknown  to  the  Syrians,  and  untranslated  by  them,  until  so  late 
as  the  sixth  century.  Besides,  they  are  actually  quoted  by  Ephraim  Syrus, 
in  the  middle  of  the  fourth  century,  or  more  than  200  years  before  the 
Philoxenian  version  was  produced.  (See  Hug,  Introduction,  vol.  i.  p.  356, 
and  Michaelis,  Introduction,  ii.  i.  p.  55.)  It  is  therefore  probable  that  they 
were  translated  after  the  decease  of  those  excellent  men  who  translated  the 
Peshito  canonical  books ;  and  that,  for  this  and  other  reasons,  they  were 
held  in  less  estimation  by  the  Syrian  Christians,  and  were  but  rarely 
inserted  among  their  canonical  books. 

THE    PLACE    OF   TRANSLATION. 

Most  of  those  who  carry  back  the  origin  of  this  version  to  the  close  of 
the  Jirst,  and  the  commencement  of  the  second  century,  regard  Antioch  as 
most  probably  the  place  where  it  was  produced :  because,  there  the  first 
Syrian  church  was  gathered,  and  chiefly  by  the  labors  of  Barnabas  and 
Paul;  there  also  the  Apostle  Peter  taught;  and  John,  surnamed  Mark; 
and  Silas,  a  companion  of  Paul ;  and  there  the  disciples  first  bore  the  name 
of  Christians.  That  city  was  the  capital  of  all  Syria ;  and  thither  Paul 
and  Peter,  and  other  apostolical  men,  often  resorted.  There  the  mother 
church  of  all  Syria  long  flourished ;  and  from  it,  undoubtedly,  Christianity 
was  propagated,  not  only  throughout  Syria,  but  also  in  Mesopotamia,  and 
in  all  the  countries  in  which  the  Syriac  language  prevailed.  No  place,  in 
that  caily  age,  aflforded  such  advantages,  or  afl^urded  such  inducements,  for 
producing  a  correct  Syriac  version  of  the  Christian  Scriptures. 

Michaelis,  however,  (Introduction,  ii.  i.  39,)  dissents  from  this  opinion  : 
and  he  has  been  followed  by  most  of  the  later  German  writers.  He  says: 
"The  common  opinion  in  Europe,  that  the  version  was  made  at  Antioch — 
was  never  entertained  in  Asia:"  and  "  it  is  highly  improbable  in  itself: 


APPENDIX    II.  497 


for,  Greek  being  the  current  language  in  all  the  cities  to  the  west  of  the 
Euphrates,  and  especially  at  Antioch,  no  motive  could  have  existed  for 
making  a  translation  of  the  Greek  Testament  in  that  city.  Though  no 
tradition  were  still  extant,  that  the  Syriac  version  was  written  at  Edessa, 
it  would  naturally  occur  as  the  most  probable  place,  it  being  a  city  where 
the  Christian  religion  was  planted  in  the  first  century,  was  adopted  by  its 
sovereigns,  who  erected  churches  with  all  the  magnificence  of  heathen 
temples, — was  thence  early  and  widely  propagated  in  the  eastern  parts  of 
Asia ; — and  a  city,  not  only  whose  language  was  Syriac,  but  which,  during 
many  ages,  was  the  eastern  metropolis  of  the  Christian  world." — Again  he 
says,  (p.  74,)  "  Syria  had  an  established  church  at  an  earlier  period  than 
any  country  in  Europe,  for  the  kings  of  Edessa  were  converted  to  Christi- 
anity ie/ore  the  middle  of  the  first  century^  and  the  ceremonies  of  the  Church 
were  attended  with  solemnity  and  pomp.  When  a  religion  is  thus  publicly 
introduced,  the  first  care  is  to  procure  an  authentic  version  of  the  sacred 
writings  for  the  public  service." — But,  surely,  it  is  assuming  a  great  deal, 
to  afiirm,  that  Greek  was  so  far  the  current  language  of  all  Syria  west  of 
the  Euphrates,  and  was  so  universally  understood  by  the  common  people, 
that  no  translation  of  the  Scriptures  into  Syriac  was  there  needed,  (See 
Dr.  E.  Robinson's  Biblical  Repository,  vol.  i.  pp.  309-363,  Andover,  1831.) 
And,  although  we  admit  that  Christianity  early  gained  a  footing  in  Osrhoena, 
and  particularly  at  Edessa,  yet  there  is  so  much  uncertainty  about  the 
conversion  of  Abgariis,  and  his  making  Christianity  the  religion  of  the  state, 
in  the  first  century,  and  so  little  evidence  of  the  frequent  resort  of  Apostles 
and  apostolical  men  to  that  city,  or  that  it  was  really  "the  eastern  metrop- 
olis of  the  Christian  world,"  till  far  into  the  second  century, — that  we  may 
suitably  hesitate  on  this  subject.  In  our  view,  AntiocJi  has  as  strong  claims 
as  Edessa,  to  be  regarded  as  the  birthplace  of  the  Peshito,  provided  it 
originated  from  Apostles  or  apostolical  men,  and  was  written  as  early  as 
the^ys^  century. 

THE  VALUE  OF  THE  PESHITO  VERSION. 

The  great  value  of  this  translation  depends  on  its  high  antiquity,  on 
the  competence  and  fidelity  of  the  translators,  and  on  the  near  affinity  of 
its  language  to  that  spoken  by  our  Lord  and  his  Apostles.  In  all  these 
respects  it  stands  pre-eminent  among  the  numerous  versions  of  the  New 
Testament. 

On  this  subject  we  will  here  give  the  published  statements  of  various 
learned  men  who  have  devoted  particular  attention  to  this  unrivalled 
version. 

32 


498  APPENDIX    II. 


James  Martini,  a  Professor  at  Wittemberg,  in  his  elaborate  Preface 
to  the  Syriac  New  Testament,  edited  by  Trostius,  in  1610,  says:  "Let 
those  who  speak  lightly  of  this  version  know,  that  the  Syriac,  if  not  the 
very  language  in  which  Christ  himself  conversed  with  his  Apostles, 
approaches  very  nearly  to  the  vernacular  tongue  of  our  Saviour  and  his 
companions,  and  that  into  it  the  recent  books  of  the  New  Testament 
Avere  the  first  of  all  translated,  and  that,  too,  at  the  very  time  when  the 
Apostles,  (those  divine  teachers  whom  Christ  himself  had  educated,  and 
who  were  enlightened  and  instructed  by  the  Holy  Spirit,)  were  laying  the 
first  foundation  of  the  Christian  church  among  the  nations,  I  admit  that 
it  is  a  version,  but  it  is  the  ^rst  and  most  ancient  of  all  versions.  It  is  a 
version,  I  say,  but  one  to  be  preferred  before  all  others,  as  being  more 
authentic  and  more  correct.  It  is  a  version,  I  say  again,  but  made  either 
by  some  one  of  the  Evangelists,  or  certainly  by  one  of  those  who  had  the 
Apostles  present  with  them  at  Antioch,  whom  they  could  consult  and  hear 
speak  on  many  of  the  obscurer  passages.  And  therefore  to  this  version 
only  can  we  safely  go,  when  any  obscurity  or  difficulty  occurs  in  the 
original  Greek.  This  only  can  be  safely  consulted  and  relied  upon,  when- 
ever there  is  doubt  respecting  the  import  or  the  rendering  of  any  passage. 
By  this  only  is  the  Greek  text  illuminated  and  correctly  explained.  For 
the  authority  of  this  version  very  nearly  approximates  (proximo  accedit) 
to  that  of  the  Greek  original." 

Wolfgang  Francius,  a  colleague  of  Martini,  in  his  Treatise  on  Iler- 
mcneutics,  (p.  46,)  says :  "  This  version,  all  the  learned  pronounce  and 
declare  to  be  the  purest  of  all  versions :  and,  doubtless,  it  was  so  exactly 
transferred  by  the  holy  men,  because  Christ  spoke  and  discoursed  in  the 
Syriac  language :  so  that  we  cannot  doubt,  that  the  Apostles  and  the  apos- 
tolical men  carefully  inquired  after  and  laid  up  the  very  words  of  Christ, 
and,  with  a  holy  veneration,  endeavored  to  record  them  in  this  version." — 
And  (p.  38)  he  says :  "  Among  all  the  versions  of  the  New  Testament, 
that  which  holds  the  first  rank,  and  is  the  most  exact,  felicitous,  and  divine, 
is  ccilaiuly  the  Syriac,  which,  undoubtedly,  was  most  faithfully  handed 
down  by  apostolical  men,  who  remembered  well  the  recently  uttered  words 
of  Christ  and  his  Apostles,  and  understood  their  meaning.  For  Christ 
himself  used  this  language." 

Emanuel  Tremellius,  in  the  Preface  to  his  Syriac  New  Testament, 
a.  d.  1568,  says:  "It  is  entirely  consonant  with  truth,  that  this  version 
was  formed  at  the  very  commencement  of  the  Christian  church,  either  by 
the  Apostles  themselves  or  by  their  disciples :  unless  we  would  suppose 
that  in  writing  they  had  regard  only  to  strangers,  and  cared  little  or  nothing 
for  their  own  countrymen." 


APPENDIX    II.  499 


Brian  Walton,  in  the  Prolegomena  to  his  Biblia  Polyglotta,  (p.  92,) 
says :  "  The  Syriac  version  of  the  New  Testament  exhibits  the  native 
aspect,  (faciem  nativam.)  of  the  original  text,  and  confirms  its  integrity. 
For  it  follows  the  Greek  text  for  the  most  part,  xara  iriSa,  strictly.  For, 
the  New  Testament  being  written  in  Greek,  by  men  whose  vernacular 
language  was  Si/riac,  everywhere  savors  of  Syriasms.  Hence,  Ludovicus 
de  Dieu  (in  his  Harmonia  trium  Linguarum)  affirms,  that'  the  true  import 
of  the  phraseology  of  the  New  Testament  can  scarcely  be  learned,  except 
from  the  Syriac.  For  no  one  will  say  that  the  phraseology  of  the  Evan- 
gelists and  Apostles  is  pure  Greek :  and  it  would  be  easier  for  Europeans 
to  imitate  the  elegance  of  Plato  and  Aristotle,  than  for  Plato  and  Aristotle 
to  explain  to  us  the  New  Testament,  because  the  holy  men  conceived  in 
Syriac,  that  which  they  wrote  in  Greek-,  injecting  the  force  of  their  ver- 
nacular tongue  into  foreign  words."  After  accounting  for  some  diversity  in 
the  orthography  of  certain  Syriac  words,  such  as  Golgotha,  Aceldama, 
Mammona,  &c.,  in  the  Greek  and  Syriac  New  Testaments,  by  saying,  that 
the  Peshito  of  both  Testaments  is  written  in  the  Antiochian  dialect,  and 
not  in  the  dialect  of  Jerusalem,  he  concludes  thus :  "  From  these  most 
ancient  versions  we  infer,  that  this  (the  Syriac)  language  is  of  the  highest 
importance,  because  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament,  to  whom  this 
language  was  vernacular,  first  preached  the  divine  oracles  in  it  to  the  Jews, 
and  to  the  nations  around  them,  and  afterwards  wrote  them  out  in  Greek, 
yet  retaining  everywhere  the  spirit  [gustum)  of  the  Syriac.  Nay,  it  was 
vernacular  to  the  Lord  and  Saviour  himself;  He  drew  it  in  with  his 
mother's  milk :  and  in  it,  the  only-begotten  Son  of  God  revealed  to  the 
world  the  will  of  God,  and  the  express  promises  of  eternal  life.  This 
language.  He  consecrated  by  his  holy  lips  ;  in  this  language.  He  taught  the 
doctrines  of  the  Gospel ;  in  it.  He  offered  his  prayers  to  the  Father,  laid 
open  the  mysteries  hidden  from  the  world,  and  heard  the  voice  of  the 
Father  coming  from  heaven :  so  that  wc  may  say, 

'  Lingua  hominum  est  lingua  nobilitata  Dei.' 

And,  as  a  poet  has  said  of  a  Syrian  lexicographer, 

'  Nos  docet  hie  unus,  Numinis  ore  loqui.' 

Moreover,  this  is  the  language  of  the  Christian  doctors  through  nearly  all 
the  East,  as  appears  from  the  Liturgies  and  Divine  Offices  almost  every- 
where performed  in  it." 

Rev.  Ezra  Stiles,  D.D.,  Pres.  of  Yale  College,  in  his  Inaugural 
Oration,  says  :  "  Kindred  with  this,  [the  Hebrew,]  or  rather  a  bath-kol,  and 
daughter-voice,  is  the  Syriac,  in  Avhich  the  greater  part  of  the  New  Testa- 


500  APPENDIX    II. 


ment  (I  believe)  was  originally  ivritten,  and  not  merely  translated,  in  the 
Apostolic  age.  .  .  .  The  Syriac  Testament,  therefore,  is  of  high  authority  ; 
nay,  with  me,  of  the  same  authority  as  the  Greek." 

The  opinion  of  Dr.  Stiles,  that  the  greater  part  of  the  books  of  the 
New  Testament  were  originally  written  in  Syriac,  and  not  merely 
translated,  is  far  from  being  so  strange  as  to  have  no  other  advocate. 
INIany  have  believed  that  Matthew's  Gospel  and  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews,  if  not  also  some  other  books,  were  originally  written  in  Hebrew 
or  Jewish  Aramaean.  And  J.  A.  Bolten  (in  his  German  Translation  of  the 
Epistles,  with  Notes,  Altona,  1800,  2  vols.  8vo.)  maintains,  that  nearly  all 
the  Epistles  must  have  been  first  composed  by  the  Apostles  in  Aramaean, 
their  native  tongue,  and  then  committed  by  them  to  some  of  their  Greci- 
zing  companions,  (e.  g.  Titus,  Timothy,  Tertius,  Sosthenes,  &c.,)  by  whom 
they  were  translated  into  Greek  before  their  publication.  And  Bertholdt 
(Einleitung,  §  46,  vol.  i.  p.  148-154)  accedes  to,  and  defends,  this  opinion. 
And  he  thinks  that,  after  due  time  for  reflection,  the  learned  world  will 
generally  come  into  it.  Such  an  hypothesis  does  not  militate  at  all  against 
the  authority  of  the  original  Greek,  because  it  supposes  the  Greek  transla- 
tion to  have  been  made  by  the  special  direction  of  the  Apostles,  and  to 
have  been  inspected,  and  fully  approved  by  them.  But  it  does  show  us 
that  the  Syriac  version  may  he  something  more  than  a  mere  translation, 
and  may  have  nearly,  or  quite  equal  authority,  Avith  the  Greek. 

John'  D.  Miciiaelis,  in  his  Introd.  to  the  New  Testament,  (translation 
of  ]\larsh,  ed.  London,  1802,  vol.  ii.  P.  I.  p.  40,  &c.,)  says :  "  Tlie  Peschito  is 
the  very  best  translation  of  the  Greek  Testament  that  I  have  ever  read; 
that  of  Luther  ....  holding  the  second  rank.  Of  all  the  Syriac  authors 
with  which  I  am  acquainted,  not  excepting  Ephraim  and  Bar-Hebraeus,  its 
language  is  the  most  elegant  and  pure ;  not  loaded  with  foreign  words,  like 
the  Philoxenian  version  and  other  later  writings,  and  discovers  the  hand 
of  a  master  in  rendering  those  passages  where  the  two  idioms  deviate  from 
each  other.  It  has  no  marks  of  the  stiffness  of  a  translation,  but  is  written 
with  the  ease  and  fluency  of  an  original :  and  this  excellence  of  its  style 
must  be  ascribed  to  its  antiquity,  and  to  its  being  written  in  a  city  that 
was  the  residence  of  Syrian  kings.  ...  It  is  true  that  the  Syriac  version, 
like  all  human  productions,  is  not  destitute  of  faults,  and  (what  is  not  to 
be  regarded  as  a  blemish)  differs  frequently  from  the  modern  mode  of 
explanation.  But  I  know  of  none  that  is  so  free  from  error,  and  none 
that  I  consult  with  so  much  confidence,  in  case  of  difficulty  and  doubt.  I 
have  never  met  with  a  single  instance  where  the  Greek  is  so  interpreted, 
as  to  betray  any  weakness  or  ignorance  in  the  translator :  and  though  in 
many  other  translations,  the  original  is  rendered  in  so  extraordinary  a 


APPENDIX    II.  501 


manner  as  almost  to  excite  a  smile^  the  Syriac  version  must  ever  be  read 
with  profound  veneration."  After  a  few  sentences,  Michaelis  adds  :  "  The 
affinity  of  the  Syriac  to  the  dialect  of  Palestine,  is  so  great  as  to  justify, 
in  some  respects,  the  assertion  that  the  Syriac  translator  has  recorded  the 
actions  and  speeches  of  Christ  in  the  very  language  in  which  he  spol^e.  .  .  . 
The  difference  between  the  dialect  which  was  spoken  by  Christ,  and  that 
of  the  Syriac  translator,  consisted  almost  wholly  in  the  mode  of  pi-onoun- 
cing ;  and  if  a  proper  use  had  been  made  of  this  advantage,  the  Syriac 
version  would  be  the  most  valuable  commentary  on  the  New  Testament. 
!Many  obscure  passages  would  be  made  clear,  if  the  words  were  still  on 
record  which  Jesus  spoke  with  his  disciples  in  the  Aramaean  language. 
But  the  translator  appears  not  to  have  been  fortunate  in  rendering  passages 
of  this  nature.  .  .  .  This  circumstance  alone  affords  sufficient  evidence 
that  the  Syriac  version  was  not  written  by  one  of  Christ's  immediate 
disciples.'''' — (Ibid.  p.  44.)  "  The  Syriac  version  ....  leads  us  sometimes 
to  just  and  beautiful  explanations,  where  other  help  is  insufficient,  e.  g. 
Matt.  vi.  7;  John,  xvi.  2;  Rom.  ix.  22;  and  xiii.  3;  and  confirms  some 
ancient  rites  in  which  we  are  deeply  interested,  such  as  the  celebi'ation  of 
Sunday,  1  Cor.  xi.  20.  And  in  discovering  either  the  meaning  of  an 
unusual  word,  or  the  unusual  meaning  of  a  common  word,  where  no 
assistance  can  be  had  from  the  Greek  authors,  the  Syriac  version  may  be 
of  singular  service,  as  the  translator  was  probably  acquainted  with  the 
language  of  common  life,  as  well  as  the  language  of  books ;  and  is,  at 
least,  of  equal  authority  with  a  Greek  lexicon  of  later  ages." — (p.  45.) 
"The  chief  advantage  to  be  derived  from  the  Syriac  version  is,  in  applying 
it  to  the  purposes  of  criticism.  Its  high  antiquity,  and  frequent  deviation 
from  the  common  reading  in  passages  of  importance,  must  recommend  the 
use  of  it  to  every  critic,  who  in  general  will  find  himself  rewarded  for  his 
trouble.  .  .  .  The  difference  between  the  Syriac  version  and  the  greatest 
part  of  the  Greek  manuscripts,  is  no  grouixl  for  condemning  the  former. 
It  is  natural  to  suppose,  from  its  great  antiquity,  that  it  must  deviate  in 
many  cases  from  the  Greek  manuscripts,  the  oldest  of  which  were  written 
above  four  hundred  years  later,  and  are  mostly  the  productions  of  coun- 
tries remote  from  Syria." 


MANUSCRIPTS    OF    THE    PESHITO    NEW    TESTAMENT. 

In  his  Novi  Test.  Versioncs  SyriacT,  TTafn.  1780, 4to.,  /.  G.  C.  Adler  di- 
vides the  manuscripts  of  the  Poshito  New  Testament  into  two  classes,  the 
Jacobite  and  the  Nestorian^  the  former  written  in  Mesopotamia,  Syria,  Pales- 


502  APPENDIX    II. 


tine,  and  Egypt,  the  latter  written  in  Persia  and  in  the  East  Indies  ;  but  there 
is  very  little  difference  between  the  texts  of  the  two.  Most  of  the  copies 
of  both  omit  the  2d  Epistle  of  Peter,  the  2d  and  3d  Epistles  of  John,  the 
Epistle  of  Jude,  and  the  Apocalypse.  They  likewise  generally  omit  the 
story  of  the  Adulteress,  John,  vii.  53  to  viii.  11  ;  and  the  disputed  text, 
1  John,  V.  7;  and  also  Luke,  xxii.  17,  18. 

The  Nestorian  manuscripts  arrange  the  books  of  the  New  Testament 
in  an  order  peculiar  to  themselves.  After  the  Four  Gospels,  which  they 
commonly  put  into  into  a  separate  volume,  and  denominate  the  Gospel, 
they  arrange  the  other  books,  which  they  call  tke  Apostles,  in  the  follow- 
ing order:  (1)  the  Acts;  (2)  the  three  Catholic  Epistles,  (1st  Epistle  of 
Peter,  1st  Epistle  of  John,  and  the  Epistle  of  James) ;  (3)  the  Fourteen 
Epistles  of  Paul,  in  the  same  order  as  in  our  Bibles. 

Both  the  Jacobites  and  the  Nestorians  divide  all  these  books  into 
Lessons  for  public  worship,  and  in  such  a  manner,  that  the  whole  are  read 
over  once  a  year.  The  Lessons  from  the  Gospels  are  248 ;  and  those 
from  the  Acts  and  Epistles  are  245.  The  length  of  the  Lessons  varies, 
according  to  the  solemnity  of  the  days  for  which  they  were  appointed,  and 
the  connection  and  sense  of  the  passages.  The  average  length  of  the 
Lessons  is  about  15^-  of  our  verses,  or  half  the  average  length  of  our 
chapters,  Besides  this  division  into  Lessons  for  the  public  worship,  there 
is  a  division  into  Chapters  or  Paragraphs,  according  to  the  sense.  One 
Nestorian  manuscript  divides  these  books  in  165  Chapters  ;  each,  on  an 
average,  being  equal  to  one  and  a  half  of  our  chapters.  Another,  a 
Jacobite  Codex  Evengeliorum,  divides  the  Four  Gospels  into  1389  short 
Chapters  or  Paragraphs,  averaging  less  than  three  verses  each. 

Till  recently,  the  greatest  collection  of  Syriac  manuscripts  was  to  be 
found  in  the  Vatican  Library  at  Rome,  of  which  Asseman  has  given  a 
good  account  in  his  Bibliotheca  Orientalis  Clementina  Vaticana.  But 
others  were  to  be  found  at  Florence,  IMilan,  Paris,  Vienna,  Oxford,  and 
elsewhere.  Adler  (in  the  work  above  mentioned)  gives  account  of  fourteen 
Peshito  manuscripts  of  the  New  Testament,  eight  of  them  Jacobite,  and  six 
Nestorian.  Of  the  eight  Jacobite,  seven  contained  only  the  Four  Gospels, 
and  the  eighth  only  the  Acts  and  Epistles.  Of  the  six  Nestorian,  three  con- 
tained all  the  books  of  the  proper  Peshito  Canon  ;  one  contained  only  the 
Four  Gospels  ;  and  two  contained  only  the  Epistles  of  Paul.  The  dates  of 
these  fourteen  manuscripts  ranged  from  a.  d.  548,  down  to  the  Jicformation. 
Those  written  before  a.  d.  800,  were  all  in  the  Estrangelo  character.  Those 
of  later  date,  if  Jacobite,  slide  more  and  more  into  the  cursive  character 
terminating  at  last  in  the  modern  Syriac  letters.  The  Nestorian  manu- 
scripts since  a.  d.  800,  are  written  in  the  character  still  in  use  among  the 


APPENDIX    II.  503 


Nestorian  Christians,  a  modified  form  of  the  Estrangelo,  differing  con- 
siderably from  our  printed  Syriac. 

Dr.  Buchanan,  vcho  travelled  extensively  among  the  Syrian  Christians 
of  India,  in  the  years  1806  and  7,  "discovered  and  obtained,"  (says  Dr. 
Home,)  "numerous  ancient  manuscripts  of  the  Scriptures,  which  are  now 
deposited  in  the  public  library  at  Cambridge.  One  of  these,  which  was 
discovered  in  a  remote  Syrian  church  near  the  mountains,  is  pai'ticularly 
valuable.  It  contains  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  engrossed  with 
beautiful  accuracy  in  the  Estrangelo  character,  on  strong  vellum,  in  large 
folio,  and  having  three  columns  in  a  page."  "In  the  opinion  of  Mr. 
Yeates,  who  has  published  a  collation  of  the  Pentateuch,  it  was  written 
about  the  seventh  century."  Ma?-  Johanan,  the  Bishop  of  Gavalan  in 
Oroomiah,  who  visited  this  country  a  few  years  since,  brought  with  him 
a  Syriac  New  Testament,  written  on  vellum,  in  the  Nestorian  character, 
and  forming  a  very  thick  4to.  volume.  Its  datfe  is  not  ascertained,  but 
from  the  character  of  the  writing,  it  is  probably  not  very  ancient.  This, 
and  some  other  Syriac  manuscripts,  are  lodged  in  the  Missionary  Rooms 
of  A.  B.  For.  Miss,  at  Boston.  The  Library  of  the  American  Oriental 
Society,  at  Boston,  likewise  contains  some  Syriac  manuscripts. 

The  "  London  Quarterly  Review,"  for  December,  1845,  has  an  article 
on  Valuable  Manuscripts  recently  brought  to  England  from  the  Monas- 
teries of  Egypt.  This  treasure  was  first  discovered  by  Lord  Prudhoe,  in 
1828,  and  has  since  been  almost  wholly  bought  up  and  transported  to 
England.  The  manuscripts  are  in  Coptic,  Ethiopic,  Syriac,  and  Arabic. 
Their  ages  vary  from  a.  d.  411  downwards.  A  manuscript,  dated  a.d.  464,  of 
the  Syriac  Peshito  Pentateuch,  is  the  oldest  biblical  manuscript.  There  are 
about  thirty  volumes  of  this  version  of  portions  of  the  Old  Testament,  dated 
about  the  sixth  century.  Of  the  Peshito  New  Testament,  there  are  forty 
manuscripts,  of  about  the  same  date.  The  age  of  these,  and  the  authority 
of  this  version,  will  make  them  of  great  value  to  critical  students  of  the 
Bible.  Among  other  works  in  this  collection,  there  is  said  to  be  "the 
Recension  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  by  Mar  Jacob,  Bishop  of 
Edessa"  (in  the  seventh  century.)  Besides  these  biblical  works,  in  this  rich 
collection  there  is  a  large  number  of  theological  productions,  of  the  same 
ancient  times. 


EDITIONS    OF    THE    PESIIITO    NEW    TESTAMENT. 

The  first  edition  was  printed  at  Vienna,  in  Austria,  a.  d.  1555,  at  the 
expense  of  the  Emperor  Ferdinand  I.,  prompted  by  his  Chancellor,  Albert 
Widmansted.    It  was  intended  for  distribution  amonii  the  Jacobite  Christians 


504  APPENDIX    II. 


in  the  East,  whose  Patriarch,  in  the  year  1552,  sent  Moses  of  Mar  den  as  his 
envoy  to  Europe,  for  the  twofold  purpose  of  cementing  a  union  with  the 
See  of  Rome,  and  procuring  the  printing  of  the  Syriac  New  Testament  for 
the  use  of  his  people.  Moses  of  Mar  den  brought  with  him  a  manuscript  copy, 
prepared  in  the  East ;  and  likewise  superintended  the  press.  One  other 
manuscript,  containing  the  Four  Gospels,  was  also  consulted.  The  edition 
was  neatly  and  accurately  printed  in  4to.,  containing  the  simple  text,  and 
embracing  all  the  Books  of  the  New  Testament,  except  the  2d  Epistle  of 
Peter,  the  2d  and  3d  of  John,  the  Epistle  of  Jude,  and  the  Apocalypse. 
It  also  omitted  the  story  of  the  Adulteress.  As  this  edition  was  nearly 
all  sent  to  the  East,  copies  of  it  are  rare  in  Europe. 

2.  In  1508,  Emanuel  TrernelUus  republished,  at  Heidelberg,  in  folio,  the 
edition  of  Vienna,  in  Hebrew  characters,  and  accompanied  it  with  a  Latin 
translation  made  by  himself  He  likewise  had  a  Syriac  manuscript,  but 
he  made  little  use  of  it. 

3.  In  1571,  Guy  le  Fevre  de  la  Boderie,  [Boderiamis,)  reprinted  the 
same  text,  both  in  Syriac  and  Hebrew  letters,  accompanied  with  a  Latin 
translation,  in  the  third  volume  of  the  Antwerp  Polyglott  Bible.  Boderie 
also  had  a  Syriac  manuscript,  brought  from  the  East  by  William  Postell, 
from  which  he  drew  some  various  readings. 

4  and  5.  The  fourth  and  fifth  editions  were  in  Hebrew  letters,  and 
without  points,  printed  at  Antwerp,  by  Plantin,  in  1573  and  1575  ;  the 
first  in  8vo.  the  other  18mo. 

6.  In  1584,  La  Boderie  reprinted,  at  Paris,  4to.,  the  Syriac  text  in 
Syriac  letters,  with  an  interlineary  Latin  translation. 

7.  In  1579,  EUas  Ilutter  inserted  Tromellius  Hebrew-Syriac  text  in 
his  Polyglott  New  Testament,  and  supplied  the  deficient  Books  by  Syriac 
of  his  own  making. 

8.  In  1G21,  Martin  Trost,  at  Kothen,  in  Anhalt,  reprinted  the  Syriac 
text  of  the  Vienna  edition,  in  fair  Syriac  types,  with  a  Latin  translation  ; 
1  vol.  4to. 

Hitherto,  the  2d  Epistle  of  Peter;  the  2d  and  3d  of  John,  the  Epistle 
of  Jude,  and  the  Apocalypse,  had  not  been  printed  from  manuscripts. 
But  in  1G27,  Lewis  de  Lieu  published,  at  Leyden,  the  Apocalypse,  from  a 
manuscript  brought  from  India,  which  had  been  the  propeity  of  Scaliger ; 
and  in  1630,  Edward  Pocock  published,  also  at  Leyden,  the  four  lacking 
Epistles,  from  a  manuscript  in  the  Bodleian  library  at  Oxford.  And  since 
that  time,  the  editions  of  the  Peshito  New  Testament  have  contained  all 
the  books  that  compose  the  New  Testament  Canon. 

9.  In  1C45,  the  Peshito  New  Testament  was  inserted  in  the  Paris 
Polyglott,   copied  from   the   Antwerp   Polyglott,  and   enlarged   by  the 


APPENDIX    II.  505 


insertion  of  the  wanting  Epistles  and  the  Apocalypse ;  the  whole  being 
revised  and  coi-rected  by  Gabriel  Sionita. 

10.  In  1G53,  the  London  Polyglott  republished  the  entire  Syriac  New 
Testament  from  the  Paris  Polyglott,  and  added,  for  the  first  time,  the 
history  of  the  Adulteress,  from  a  manuscript  belonguig  to  Archbishop 
Usher. 

11.  In  1664,  Giles  Gutbir  published  his  Syriac  New  Testament  at 
Hamburg,  in  a  moderate  sized  r2mo.  volume,  for  common  use.  His  text 
is  that  of  Trost,  with  some  amendments,  and  is  followed  with  a  list  of 
various  readings,  chiefly  derived  from  the  printed  editions.  This  is  a 
cheap  edition  and  very  common,  and  it  would  be  a  good  edition,  if  the 
typography  were  what  it  should  be.  It  is  generally  accompanied  with  a 
good  compendious  Lexicon  to  the  Syi-iac  New  Testament. 

12.  In  1G84,  Christian  Kiiorre  reprinted,  in  13nio.,  at  Salzbach, 
Plantin's  edition  of  1573,  in  Hebrew  letters. 

13.  In  1713,  the  Congregatio  de  Propaganda  Fide,  at  Rome,  printed 
the  New  Testament,  Syriac  and  Arabic,  in  2  vols.,  folio,  for  the  use  of  the 
Maronites. 

14.  In  1708,  John  Leusden  and  Charles  Schaaf  published  at  Leyden 
their  excellent  edition,  Syriac  and  Latin,  in  large  4to.,  with  a  copious  list  of 
the  various  readings  in  ditferent  editions.  This  edition  was  reprinted  by 
Schaaf  in  1717.  He  also  published,  with  both  editions,  his  highly 
esteemed  Lexicon  Syriacum  Concorduntiale  in  Novum  Test.  Syr.,  in  large 
4to. 

15.  In  1713,  the  Schaafian  text  was  inserted  in  the  Biblia  Quadralinguia 
of  Christian  Heineccius,  Leyden,  folio. 

16.  In  1805,  Richard  Jones  republished,  at  Oxford,  in  4to.,  the 
Schaafian  text,  corrected  by  two  Syriac  manuscripts  in  the  Bodleian 
Library,  and  by  the  Commentary  of  Bar-Hehraeus.^  existing  in  the  same 
library. 

17.  In  1816,  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society  published  at  London, 
(Richard  Watts,  printer,)  a  very  beautiful  edition  of  the  Syriac  text, 
corrected  by  manuscripts,  in  552  pages,  4to.,  intended  for  distribution  in 
India.  '•  This  edition"  (says  Mr.  Home)  "  was  corrected  for  the  press,  as 
far  as  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  by  the  late  Rev.  Dr.  Buchanan,  and  was 
completed  by  Rev.  Samuel  Lee,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Arabic  in  the  University 
of  Cambridge." 

18.  In  1826,  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society  reprinted  their 
edition  of  1816,  in  a  fair,  but  smaller  type,  in  360  pages,  4to,  This  edition 
was,  probably,  superintended  by  Professor  Lee. 

19.  Lastly  :    In   1846,  the  IMissionaries  of  the  A.  B.  C.  F.  M.,  at 


506  -  APPENDIX    II. 


Oroomiah,  in  Persia,  having  completed  their  translation  of  the  New 
Testament  into  the  vernacuhir  dialect  of  the  modern  Nestorians,  printed  it, 
with  the  Syriac  text,  in  parallel  columns,  and  both  in  the  modern  Nestorian 
character,  with  a  marginal  notice  of  all  the  deviations  of  the  Syriac  fiom 
the  Greek  text :  printed  at  Oroomiah,  in  one  vol.,  large  4to.  The  Syriac 
text  of  this  edition  appears  to  coincide  with  that  of  the  British  and  Foreign 
Bible  Society. 

It  has  often  been  regretted,  that  the  editors  of  the  Peshito  New  Testa- 
ment have  taken  so  little  jjains  to  collate  manuscripts,  and  to  obtain  a 
correct  text.  They  have,  for  the  most  part,  followed  the  editio  2Jrinceps, 
with  some  changes  in  the  vowel  points,  and  have  admitted  but  few  changes 
of  words  on  the  authority  of  manusci'ipts.  The  received  text,  it  is  said, 
appears  to  have  been  derived  chiefly  from  the  Nestorian  family  of  manu- 
scripts, and  needs  a  thorough  collation,  especially  with  manuscripts  of  the 
Jacobite  family. 


THE  PHILOXENIAN  VERSION  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 
ITS    ORIGIN. 

The  history  of  this  version  is  given  in  the  Syriac  Indorsements  on  its 
manuscripts.  One  of  the  fullest  of  these  Indorsements  is  subjoined  to  a 
manuscript  of  the  Four  Gospels,  in  the  Bibliotheca  Angelica  of  the  Augus- 
tinians  at  Rome.  It  may  be  thus  rendered  in  English: — "This  Book  has 
been  collated  with  two  approved  manuscripts. — This  Book  of  the  Four 
Holy  Evangelists  was  translated  from  the  Greek  tongue  into  Syriac,  with 
much  accuracy  and  great  labor ;  and  first,  in  the  city  of  Mabvg  (,.Q.d!sD), 
in  the  days  of  the  holy  Piiiloxenus,  Confessor,  and  Bishop  of  that  city. 
It  was  afterwards  collated,  with  much  care,  by  me,  Thomas,  a  poor  sinner, 
with  two  highly  approved  and  correct  Greek  copies,  at  Antonia,  of  the 
great  city  Alexandria,  in  the  Monastery  of  St.  Anthony.  Its  completion 
will,  surely,  conduce  to  the  benefit  of  my  sinful  soul,  and  of  the  many  who 
love  and  desire  to  know  and  preserve  this  accuracy  in  the  sacred  books. 
It  was  written  and  collated,  at  the  place  above  named,  in  the  year  927  of 
Alexander,  in  the  4th  Indiction.  But,  how  much  labor  and  anxiety  I  had, 
in  this  and  the  other  [books],  the  Lord  only  knowcth,  who  will  recompense 
every  man  according  to  his  works  in  the  day  of  his  righteous  judgment." 
— The  Indorsements  on  two  other  manuscripts,  as  cited  l)y  Adler,  are  sub- 
stantially the  same  with  this,  although  more  concise.     Instead  of  the  two 


APPENDIX    II,  507 


first  sentences,  they  simply  say  : — "  Tills  is  the  Book  of  the  Four  Holy 
Evangelists,  which  was  translated  from  the  Greek  tongue  in  the  year  of 
Alexander  the  Macedonian,  819,  in  the  days  of  the  holy  J/ar  Philox- 

ENUS,"  &C. 

From  these  Indorsements,  it  appears  that  this  translation  was  made  at 
Mabug,  or  Meiibij,  as  it  is  called  in  Arabic,  the  HierapoUs  of  the  Greeks, 
a  city  of  Syria,  near  the  Euphrates,  and  the  See  of  both  a  Nestorian  and 
a  Jacobite  Bishop :  and  that  it  was  made  in  the  year  819  of  Alexander, 
that  is,  A.  D.  508,  and  in  the  days  of  Philoxenus,  the  Bishop  of  Mabug.  It 
is  not  said  that  it  was  made  by  Philoxenus,  but  only  in  his  clays.  This 
Philoxemis,  otherwise  called  Xenaias,  was  the  jNIonophysite  Bishop  of  ]\Ia- 
bug,  from  A.  d.  488  to  a.  d.  518,  {se&Asseman^s  Bibliotheca  Orient,  torn,  ii.  p. 
10-46 ;)  but  he  did  not  sit  quietly  on  his  throne.  Being  a  warm  partisan 
of  Peter  Fullo,  he  was  in  sharp  conflict  nearly  all  his  life,  and  he  could 
have  had  but  little  leisure  for  biblical  studies.  The  persecutions  he  suf- 
fered, procured  for  him  the  title  of  Confessor  among  his  own  sect.  Ac- 
cording to  Moses  Affhaeus,  (in  Assemari's  Bibliotheca  Orient,  torn.  ii.  c.  10,) 
one  PoLYCARP,  a  rural  Bishop  under  Philoxenus,  made  this  translation;  and 
dedicated  it,  in  the  year  specified,  to  Philoxenus,  by  whom  he  had  been 
prompted  to  undertake  the  work.  And  hence  this  version  is  often  called 
the  Translation  of  Pohjcarp. 

It  further  appears,  front  these  Indorsements,  that  about  100  years  after 
this  version  was  made  by  Poly  carp,  one  Thomas,  a  monk,  at  Antonia,  a 
quarter  in  the  city  of  Alexandria,  and  in  the  naonastery  of  St.  Anthony,  in 
that  city,  revised  and  re-wrote  this  translation,  collating  it  with  two  (or, 
some  indorsements  say,  three)  highly  approved  Greek  manuscripts.  This 
was  in  the  year  of  Alexander  927,  or  a.  d.  616.  Who  this  Thomas  was, 
and  when  and  where  he  lived,  we  learn  from  Bar-Hehraeus'  Chronicon, 
(year  of  the  Seleucidos  927,  or  a.  d.  616.)  Bar-Hehraeus  there  says: — 
"About  this  time  flourished  Thomas  Harclensis,  (i.  e.  Thomas  of  Harkela, 
or  Harkla,^\iD;_K»,  an  obscure  village  in  Palestine,)  a  monk  of  the  monas- 
tery of  Taril ;  who,  in  his  childhood,  learned  Greek  in  the  Kenserine 
monastery,  and  was  afterwards  Bishop  of  Mabug.  Being  persecuted  by 
Domitian,  the  Meletian,  he  went  to  Egypt,  and  resided  in  Antonia  of 
Alexandria,  in  the  holy  monastery  of  the  x\ntonies ;  where,  with  praise- 
worthy diligence,  he  restored,  by  a  very  exact  and  accurate  emendation, 
the  holy  Codex  of  the  Gospels,  and  the  other  Books  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment, after  the  first  version  of  them  by  the  procuration  of  Philozenvs,  of 
Mabug." — From  this  statement,  and  from  an  inspection  of  the  manu- 
scripts, it  appears,  that  Thomas  Harclensis  corrected  the  text  of  Pohjcarp''s 
translation ;   added  various  readings,  derived  from  his  collation  of  Greek 


508  APPENDIX    II. 


manuscripts;  and  subjoined  other  marginal  notices,  especially  the  division 
into  Lessons  for  the  public  worship  through  the  year.  That  he  did  not 
materially  alter  the  text  of  Polycarp,  Adler  infers  from  a  manuscript  that 
he  examined  at  Florence,  which  had  none  of  the  marginal  notes  and 
indorsements  of  the  Harclension  recension,  yet  contained  almost  precisely 
the  same  text;  whence  he  concluded,  that  it  was  copied  from  an  ancient 
manuscript  of  Polycarp's  version,  written  before  its  revision  by  Thomas 
Harclensis. 

Such  is  the  origin  of  the  so-called  Philoxenian  version.  It  is  the 
translation  of  Pohjcar]),  as  revised,  and  furnished  with  marginal  notes,  by 
Thomas  Harclensis.  It  was  exclusively  of  Jacobite  origin ;  and  it  never 
obtained  currency  among  the  other  oriental  sects.  Yet  it  was  not  made 
for  any  sectarian  purposes ;  nor  in  hostility  to  the  Peshito  version.  The 
sole  aim  of  its  author  and  reviser,  was,  to  produce  a  Syriac  version,  which 
should  more  perfectly  resemble  the  Greek  original  as  it  existed  in  their 
times. — It  embraces  all  the  books  of  the  New  Testament,  except  the 
Apocalypse.  The  history  of  the  adulteress,  is  also  wanting ;  but  not  so, 
the  2d  Epistle  of  Peter,  the  2d  and  3d  of  John,  and  the  Epistle  of  Jude; 
which  are  here  found  in  the  same  style  with  the  other  books,  and  differing 
fi'oni  the  style  of  the  same  Epistles  in  the  Peshito  version. 

CHARACTER    AND    VALUE    OF    THIS    VERSION. 

The  prominent  characteristic  of  the  Philoxenian  version,  is  extreme 
servilitt/,  even  to  the  habitual  sacrifice  of  the  purity  and  propriety  of  the 
Syriac  language.  It  generally  copies  the  Greek  phraseology,  so  exactly, 
that  it  would  often  not  be  difficult  to  translate  it  back  again  into  the  identi- 
cal words  of  the  original.  As  the  Syriac  has  no  Article,  the  definite  Article 
of  the  Greek  is  often  expressed  by  the  Syriac  pronouns  for  he,  she,  and 
thei/.  The  Greek  expletives,  which  could  not  be  expressed  in  Syriac,  arc 
sometimes  transcribed  in  the  translation.  Greek  comjwunds  are  awkwardly 
expressed,  by  two  or  more  words  in  strange  combination.  Greek  diminu- 
tives are  imitated  in  the  Syriac.  The  Greek  construction  is  followed,  as 
closely  as  possible,  without  regard  to  the  laws  of  Syriac  construction. 
And  in  all  the  proper  names,  even  those  of  Hebrew  origin,  the  Greek  or- 
thography is  imitated  in  Syriac  letters,  though  subversive  of  every  trace  of 
the  etymology,  and  perverting  the  true  pronunciation.  Even  the  case 
endings  of  these  names  are  retained ;  Avhich  could  only  serve  to  puzzle  the 
brains  of  a  Syrian  who  did  not  understand  Greek. 

Of  the  value  of  this  translation,  J.  D.  Michaclis,  (in  his  Introduction  to 
the  New  Testament,  vol.  ii.  P.  1.  p.  G7,  &c.,  ed.  Marsh,)  says:    "The  in- 


APPENDIX    II.  509 


trinsic  worth  of  the  Philoxenian  version,  admits  no  comparison  with  that 
of  the  Peshlto.  The  style  is  much  inferior,  and  more  difficult  to  be  under- 
stood ;  the  version  is  less  accurate ;  and  the  translator  was  less  acquainted 
with  the  Greek.  It  is  neither  so  valuable  to  a  divine,  for  the  purpose  of 
instruction  in  the  Christian  religion  ;  nor  to  the  learned  e.c^osi/or,  as  a  mean 
of  explaining  difficult  and  doubtful  passages.  But  the  version  is  not  devoid 
of  value,  and  is  of  real  importance  to  a  critic,  whose  object  is  to  select  a 
variety  of  readings,  with  the  view  of  restoring  the  genuine  text  of  the 
Greek  original.  For  he  may  be  fully  assured,  that  every  phrase  and 
expression  is  a  precise  copy  of  the  Greek  text,  as  it  stood  in  the  manuscript 
from  which  the  version  was  made.  But  it  is  not  prior  to  the  sixth  century  ; 
and  as  the  Peshito  was  written  either  at  the  end  of  the  first,  or  at  the  be- 
ginning of  the  second  century,  it  is  of  less  importance  to  know  the  readings 
of  the  Greek  manuscript,  that  was  used  in  the  former,  than  those  of  the 
original  employed  in  the  latter." 


EDITIONS    AND    MANUSCRIPTS    OF    THE    PHILOXENIAN    VERSION. 

No  portion  of  this  version  w\is  printed  prior  to  the  year  1778.  Of 
course,  up  to  that  time,  the  learned  had  not  the  means  of  examining  it,  and 
ascertaining  its  true  character.  The  Eev.  Gloucester  Ridley,  LL.D.,  Prebend 
of  Salisbury,  about  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  received  a  copy  of  the 
entire  version,  brought  from  Amida  in  Mesopotamia,  by  a  Mr.  Palmer. 
Ridley  immediately  applied  himself  to  the  study  of  Syriac :  and  in  1761, 
published  a  learned  Dissertation,  de  Syriacarum  JVovi  Testamenti  Versionum 
Indole  et  JJsu  ;  in  which  he  gave  the  first  good  account  of  both  translations, 
and  a  fidl  description  of  the  Philoxenian.  lie  also  prepared  for  the  press, 
a  copy  of  the  four  Gospels,  transcribed  from  his  Amidan  manuscript,  and 
collated  with  another  found  at  Oxford.  But  he  did  not  live  to  see  it 
published.  It  was  printed  at  Oxford,  Syriac  and  Latin,  with  critical  notes 
&c.,  by  Joseph  White,  Professor  of  Arabic,  in  1778,  2  vols,  in  1, 4to. 
Professor  White  then  proceeded  to  prepare  the  remainder  of  the  work  for 
the  press ;  and  published  the  book  of  Acts  and  the  seven  Catholic  Epistles, 
in  1790 ;  and  the  fourteen  Epistles  of  Paul,  in  1803,  uniform  with  the 
previous  volumes.  The  whole  is  ordinarily  bound  in  two  large  vols.  4to. 
This  edition,  so  far  as  I  have  learned,  is  the  only  one  ever  printed. — The 
Mamiscrij^ts  of  this  version  are  less  numerous  than  those  of  the  Peshito. 
Adler  examined  six  manuscripts  of  the  Gospels ;  and  he  learned  the  exist- 
ence of  some  others,  containing  the  Epistles.  Perhaps  some  of  the  forty 
manuscripts  of  the  New  Testament,  lately  brought  from  Egypt,  will  be 
found  to  belong  to  this  version. 


510  APPENDIX    II. 


OTHER  SYRIAC  VERSIONS  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Besides  the  manuscripts  of  the  Peshito  and  Philoxenian  versions,  Adlcr 
found  in  the  Vatican  at  Rome,  one  manuscript  of  the  four  Gospels,  in  a 
translation  different  from  cither.  It  is  more  servile  and  inelegant  than  the 
Peshito ;  but  is  not  so  servile  as  the  Philoxenian.  Its  idiom  also  diflers 
from  both ;  for  it  is  not  pure  Syriac,  but  is  a  species  of  Chaldee,  or  Jewish 
Aramaean :  and  the  characters  in  which  it  is  written,  approximate  to  the 
Hebrew.  Adler  supposed  it  was  made  by  some  Jewish  Christian,  about 
the  fourth  century.  And  as  it  is  written  in  Jewish  Aramaean,  and  not 
Syriac,  he  called  it  the  Hierosolymitan  version.  It  has  never  been  pub- 
lished, and  is  not  considered  of  any  great  value. 

What  some  have  called  the  Karkaphension  vERSio>f,  is  found  not  to  be 
a  new  version,  but  merely  a  recension  of  the  Peshito  Old  and  New  Testa- 
ments, made  near  the  close  of  the  tenth  century,  by  a  Jacobite  monk 
named  David,  residing  in  the  monastery  of  St.  Aaron,  on  Mount  Sigari,  in 
the  northeastern  part  of  Mesopotamia.  Dr.  Wiseman,  in  his  Ilorac  Syri- 
acae,  (Rome,  1828,  8vo.,)  has  carefully  investigated  the  history  and  charac- 
ter of  this  recension,  and  he  pronounces  it  to  be  the  Peshito  text,  with 
merely  a  change  in  the  ortliography  of  proper  names,  and  of  Graeco-Syriac 
words,  conformably  with  the  orthography  of  the  Philoxenian  version.  lie 
also  declares  it  to  be  of  Monophysite  or  Jacobite  origin.  Dr.  Lee,  how- 
ever, defends  the  old  opinion,  that  it  was  intended  for  use  among  the 
Nestorians. 


SYRIAC  TRANSLATIONS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT. 

Passing  on  to  the  Old  Testament,  we  there  find  two  distinct  translations 
of  nearly  the  whole,  as  we  before  found  two  of  the  New  Testament.  One 
of  these  is  likewise  called  the  Peshito,  and  is  very  ancient.  The  other  is 
more  modern,  resembles  the  Philoxenian,  and  bears  the  name  of  the  Syriac 
Hexapla. 


APPENDIX    II.  511 


THE  PESHITO  SYRIAC  OLD  TESTAMENT. 
ITS    ORIGIN    AND    CHARACTER. 

This  version,  as  appears  from  internal  evidence,  was  made  directly 
from  the  Hebrew,  and  before  the  Masoretic  points  came  into  use.  It 
is  quoted  and  commented  on  by  Ephraim  Syrus,  in  the  fourth  century  ; 
was  received  by  all  the  Aramaean  Christians,  of  whatever  sect,  and 
is  held  by  them  all  in  high  estimation  at  the  present  day.  They 
have  a  tradition,  that  it  is  of  the  same  age  with  the  Peshito  New  Testa- 
ment, and  that  it  was  made  in  the  days  of  Thaddeus,  the  Apostle  of 
Mesopotamia.  The  learned  also  of  modern  times,  suppose  it  to  be 
at  least  as  old  as  the  Peshito  New  Testament,  placing  its  formation  in  the 
latter  part  of  the  first  century,  or  early  in  the  second.  From  some  diver- 
sity in  the  mode  of  translating  the  different  books,  it  is  supposed  not  to 
have  been  the  work  of  one  man :  and  from  certain  peculiarities  of  diction, 
and  from  other  considerations,  it  is  concluded  that  the  translators  were 
Christians.  It  is  universally  pronounced  a  judicious  and  faithful  translation. 
Dathe  regarded  it  as  a  sure  guide  to  the  true  state  of  the  Hebrew  text,  in 
the  second  century :  and  both  Dr.  Kennkott  and  De  Rossi  derived  from  it 
many  valuable  readings.  "  Indeed,"  (says  Mr.  Horne^  Introd.  vol.  i.  p.  270,) 
"2)e  Rossi  prefers  it  to  all  the  other  ancient  versions,  and  says  that  it  closely 
follows  the  order  of  the  sacred  text,  rendering  word  for  word,  and  is  more 
pure  than  any  other."  After  comparing  a  large  portion  of  the  Sy  riac  Pen- 
tateuch with  the  Hebrew,  the  Soptuagint,  and  the  Latin  Vulgate,  the 
impression  on  our  own  mind  is,  that  the  Syriac  does  not  yield  precedence, 
in  accuracy  or  fidelity,  to  either  of  the  other  two  versions ;  while  in  its 
style,  it  is  much  more  easy  and  natural.  It  is,  undoubtedly,  more  servile 
than  the  Peshito  New  Testament,  and  throws  less  light  on  the  true  mean- 
ing of  the  original ;  yet,  on  the  whole,  it  is  a  noble  version. — It  embraces 
all  the  books  of  the  Old  Testament ;  but  it  arranges  them  in  a  different 
order.  First  comes  the  Pentateuch ;  then  the  book  of  Job ;  then  Joshua, 
Judges,  the  two  books  of  Samuel,  the  two  books  of  Kings,  and  the  two 
books  of  Chronicles;  then  the  Psalms,  Proverbs,  and  Ecclesiastes ;  then 
Ruth  and  the  Canticles ;  then  Esther ;  then  Ezra  and  Nehemiah ;  then 
Isaiah,  followed  by  the  twelve  minor  Prophets ;  then  Jeremiah,  followed 
by  Lamentations  ;  then  Ezekiel ;  and  lastly,  Daniel. — ^lost  of  the  Apocry- 
phal books  of  the  Old  Testament  are  extant  in  Syriac;  and  several  of 
them  are  found  in  the  Peshito  Codices  of  the  canonical  books :  but  I  have 
not  the  means  of  ascertaining  their  character  as  translations.     According 


512  APPENDIX    II. 


to  Mr.  Home,  four  of  them,  viz. :  Tobit,  Judith,  the  third  book  of  ^facca- 
bees,  and  the  Story  of  I^el  and  the  Dragon,  were  translated  from  the  Greek. 
Five  others  are  said  to  be  fjund  in  Syriac,  viz. :  Ecclesiasticus,  Susanna, 
Baruch,  and  the  second  and  fifth  books  of  Maccabees.  But  I  have  not 
learned  from  what  language  they  were  translated. 

EDITIONS    OF    THE    PESHITO    OLD    TESTAMENT. 

(1.)  T\\Q  first  edition  was  that  in  the  Paris  Polyglott,  printed  a.  d.  1645. 
The  manuscript  from  which  this  was  printed  was  imperfect,  and  Gabriel 
Sionita  supplied  its  deficiencies  with  translations  of  his  own,  from  the 
Latin  Vulgate.  He  also  annexed  the  vowel  points  to  the  Syriac  of  the 
nianuscri|)t.  (2.)  Walton'' s  Polyglott,  a.  d.  1G57,  also  contained  the 
Peshito  Old  Testament,  derived  from  four  manuscripts,  and  from  the  text 
of  the  Paris  Polyglott.  This  edition,  therefore,  is  purged  from  the  facti- 
tious additions  of  Gabriel  Sionita.  (3.)  In  1823,  the  British  and  Foreign 
Bible  Society  printed,  at  London,  all  the  canonical  books  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, in  this  version  ;  1  vol.  4to.  pp.  705.  In  this  edition,  which  was  in- 
tended for  circulation  among  Eastern  Christians,  the  vowel  2>oints  are  not 
added,  except  to  the  proper  names,  and  to  here  and  there  an  ambiguous 
word.  Prof  Lee,  who  prepared  the  work  for  the  press,  made  use  of  three 
manuscripts.  One  of  them,  of  great  value,  was  brought  by  Dr.  Bucha7ia/i 
from  India  ;  and  this  was  collated  by  Dr.  Lee  very  carefully.  Another 
belonged  to  the  late  Dr.  Adam  Clarice.  The  third  was  a  Syriac  Penta- 
teuch, which  Prof  Lee  found  in  a  college  library  at  Oxford.  This  is  the 
edition  which  I  use. — These,  so  far  as  I  know,  are  the  only  editions  of  the 
entire  Old  Testament  in  this  version.  Of  the  book  of  Psalms  only,  there 
have  been  six  editions ;  the  last  and  best  by  Bathe,  17C8,  Svo.  Of  the 
Pentateuch  there  has  also  been  a  separate  edition,  by  Kirsch,  1787,  4to. — 
Of  the  manuscripts  of  this  version  I  can  say  little  more  than  has  already 
been  incidentally  mentioned.  Among  those  manuscripts  lately  brought  from 
Egypt,  it  is  said,  there  is  a  Peshito  Syriac  Pentateuch,  dated  in  the  year 
A.  D.  464,  besides  thirty  other  volumes  of  this  version,  containing  portions 
of  the  Old  Testament,  and  dated  about  the  sixth  century. 


THE  SYRIAC  IIEXAPLA. 

Of  this  version  1  have  heard  of  only  two  manuscripts,  and  one  of  them 
containing  only  a  single  book.  These  manuscripts  lay  hidden  at  Milan  and 
Paris,  or  rather  were  overlooked  and  not  carefully  examined,  until  after  the 


APPENDIX    11.  513 


middle  of  the  last  century.  They  contain  a  Syriac  translation  of  the  cor- 
rected Greek  text  o£  the  Septuagint  version  in  Origeti's  Hexapla,  with  all  its 
marginal  notes  and  various  readings,  and  hence  its  name,  the  Syriac  Hexapla. 
Trom  the  indorsements  on  the  manuscripts  of  the  Syriac  Hexapla,  we  gather 
the  following  facts.  The  Greek  Hexapla  of  Origen  was  left  by  him  at  Caesarea 
in  Palestine,  and  fell  into  the  hands  of  JSusebius,  the  ecclesiastical  histori- 
an, who  was  bishop  of  C^sarea ;  and  Eusebius,  aided  by  his  friend  Pam- 
phylus,  early  in  the  fourth  century,  extracted  from  this  Hexapla  a  corrected 
Greek  text  of  the  Septuagint,  with  all  its  marginal  readings  and  glosses. 
Of  this  Eusebian  text,  with  such  a  margin,  a  cop?/,  indorsed  by  Eusebius 
himself,  was  found  at  Alexandria,  in  the  beginning  of  the  seventh  century; 
and  Athanasius,  at  that  time  the  Jacobite  Patriarch  of  Alexandria,  caused 
one  Mar  Faulus,  a  monk  and  bishop,  to  translate  that  Greek  copy  into 
Syriac,  retaining  all  its  marginal  readings  and  glosses.  This  task  Mar 
Faulus  accomplished,  at  Alexandria,  in  the  year  a.  d.  616. 

TRANSLATIONS    OF    SOME    OF    THE    SYRIAC    INDORSEMENTS. 

Tlie  third  Indorsement  to  the  second  book  of  Kings.  "  And  (now)  this 
(book)  of  the  four  kingdoms,  [this  second  book  of  Kings,]  is  added  (to 
this  volume),  being  translated  from  the  Greek  into  Syriac.  And  this,  here 
present,  is  from  the  Heptapla  Codex,  which  has  seven  compartments,  and 
which  belongs  to  the  library  of  Csesarea,  in  Palestine ;  and  from  which, 
likewise,  the  interpretations  [fragments  of  versions,  or  the  various  read- 
ings] are  annexed.  And  it  was  collated  carefully,  with  the  Codex  of  seven 
compartments,  there  being  at  the  end  of  it  this  inscription : — '  Fourth 
Book  of  the  Kingdoms,  according  to  the  seventy  :  and  I,  Eusebius,  have 
carefully  corrected  it,  Pamphylus  having  commenced  the  correction." — 
Immediately  after,  follows  the  fourth  Indorsement,  thus  : — "  This  book  is 
translated  from  the  Greek  tongue  into  Syriac,  from  the  version  of  the  Seventy- 
Two,  by  the  religious  monk.  Mar  Paulus,  Bishop  of  the  Faithful,  in  the 
great  city  of  Alexandria,  by  the  injunction  and  solicitude  of  the  holy  and 
blessed  Athanasius,  Patriarch  of  the  Faithful,  in  the  monastery  of  Mar 
Zacchaeus  Callinicensis,  while  they  resided  at  Alexandria,  m  the  days  of 
the  religious  Mar  Theodorus,  Prefect  of  the  house  of  his  monastery ;  in 
the  year  dccccxxviii.,  in  the  fifth  Indiction,  [that  is,  in  the  year  of  the 
Greek,  928,  or  A.  d.  617.]  Whoever  reads,  let  him  pray  for  the  religious 
Mar  Thomas,  Deacon,  and  Syncellus  of  the  holy  and  blessed  Patriarch,  JNIar 
Athanasius,  who  labored  and  was  at  pains ;  and  for  the  others  who  toiled 
and  labored  with  him,  that  God  may  grant  them  the  salvation  of  their  souls, 
on  account  of  their  labor  and  pains,  through  the  prayers  of  his  [God's] 


514  APPENDIX    II. 


Mother,  and  of  all  saints." — At  the  end  of  most  of  the  other  books  are 
Indorsements  of  niuch  the  same  general  import :  thus,  at  the  end  of  the 
Book  of  Isaiah,  there  is  the  following  : — "  End  of  the  Prophecy  of  Isaiah. 
This  is  annexed  (to  the  other  hooks),  from  the  Codex  of  Eusebius  and 
Pamphylus,  which  also  they  corrected  from  the  Bibliotheca  of  Origek." — 
See  also  the  Indorsements  at  the  end  of  the  twelve  minor  Prophets,  at 
the  end. of  the  Book  of  Proverbs,  end  of  the  Book  of  Canticles,  and  of  the 
Book  of  Ecclesiastcs.  In  all  these  places,  it  is  stated  that  the  Syriac 
translation  was  made  from  a  Codex,  set  forth  by  Eusebius  and  Pamphylus, 
from  the  Bibliotheca  of  Origen,  containing  various  readings  and  marginal 
notes. 

PUBLICATION    OF    THE    SVRIAC    HEXAPLA. 

Both  manuscripts  of  the  Syriac  Hexapla  are  written  in  the  Estrangclo 
character ;  and  are  apparently  ancient.  That  of  Paris  contains  only  the 
4th  [r2d]  Book  of  Kings :  and  it  was  first  brought  into  notice  in  1770,  by 
Putd  Jacob  Bnins.  That  in  the  Ambrosian  library  at  Milan,  contains 
nearly  or  quite  all  the  Old  Testament.  To  this  valuable  manuscript,  John 
Baptist  Branca,  a  doctor  in  the  Ambrosian  college,  directed  the  attention 
of  Dr.  Kennicott  and  of  e/".  P.  Bruns,  while  on  a  visit  to  JNIilan,  about  the 
year  1767.  A  ^qw  years  after,  J.  J.  BJornthal,  of  Sweden,  visited  ]\Iilan, 
examined  the  manuscript,  sent  some  specimens  of  it  to  England  and 
Sweden,  and  also  published  a  description  of  it.  Be  Bossi  then  became 
interested  in  it,  and  in  1778,  published  the  first  Psalm  as  a  specimen,  ac- 
companied by  a  full  account  of  the  manuscript.  In  the  same  year,  Matthew 
Xorberg,  of  Sweden,  visited  !Milan,  and  took  a  copy  of  a  large  part  of  it : 
and  in  the  year  1787,  he  published  at  Lund,  in  4to.,  the  books  of  Jeremiah 
and  Ezekiel,  from  his  copy.  The  next  year,  Cajetan  Bugatus,  of  Milan, 
published  the  book  of  Daniel,  Syriac  and  Latin,  4to.  He  also  commenced 
the  publication  of  the  book  of  Psalms,  about  the  same  time;  but  it  was 
not  carried  through  the  press  till  1820.  In  the  mean  time,  Bnins  had 
procured  a  copy  of  the  Paris  manuscript.  But  neither  he  nor  JVorberg, 
met  with  sufficient  encouragement  to  proceed  with  the  publication  of  their 
copies.  They  left  their  manuscript,  in  the  hands  oi  Eichhorn ;  who  at 
length  transfon-ed  them  to  Henry  Middledorpf,  a  professor  in  the  university 
of  Breslaw^i  Silesia ;  and  he  published  so  much  of  these  transciipts,  as  had 
not  before  been  published, — (viz.  the  4th  [2(1]  book  of  Kings,  Isaiah,  the 
twelve  minor  Prophets,  Proverbs,  Job,  Canticles,  Lamentations,  and  Eccle- 
siastes,) — in  one  large  vol.  4to.,  Berlin,  1835;  Avith  a  learned  Preface, 
containing  the  facts  above  stated.  The  following  books,  we  suppose,  have 
never  been  published,  viz.  :  the  entire  Pentateuch,  Joshua,  Judges,  Euth, 


APPENDIX    II.  515 


first  and  second  of  Samuel,  first  of  Kings,  the  two  books  of  Clu'onicles, 
Ezra,  Nchemiah,  and  Esther. 

This  Syriac  version  adheres  very  closely  to  the  Greek ;  and  therefore 
■will  aid  us,  so  far  as  it  extends,  in  ascertaining  toliat  text  of  the  Septuagint 
was  approved  by  Origeti,  and  by  Eusebius  and  Pamphylus.  It  may  also 
help  us  to  recover  some  of  the  deviations  from  the  Septuagint,  in  the 
several  Greek  versions  collated  by  Origen.  Of  course,  for  criticism  of  the 
Septuagint  Greek  text,  it  is  of  great  value.  But  for  the  interpretation  of 
the  Scriptures,  it  cannot  be  of  much  use,  on  account  of  its  servility,  and  its 
adherence  to  the  Septuagint.  As  a  translation,  it  is  very  like  the  Philox- 
enian  New  Testament :  which  Thomas  Ilarclensis  was  revising  at  Alexan- 
di'ia  at  the  very  time,  when  Mar  Paulus  was  producing  this  version.  As 
the  Peshito  New  Testament  is  far  more  valuable,  for  exegetical  purposes, 
than  the  Philoxenian  version ;  so  the  Peshito  Old  Testament  which  is  a 
faithful  translation  from  the  Hebrew,  must  be  far  more  valuable  to  an  in- 
terpreter,  than  the  Syriac  Hexapla,  which  is  a  servile  translation  from  the 


Septuagint  Greek. 


THE  END. 


Date  Due 

Ili^^ ■ 

1 

^ -^^ 

1 

7^"-^;:==— • 

JliMSff"^'"  I" 

^W^i^^So 

•H^' 

-« ""•'J'l 

'■ 

1 

1 

^ 

I!         ! 


< 


ill 

J!|;II 

111   ! 


If 


mm 


^iiiiliii 

'■111,       I     )]: 


Sii-i!PilP!iili 

mm 


m,im 


i 


iiilllii 


